MetaAnalysis of Methods for Scaling Blockchain
Technology for Automotive Uses
Sid Masih
Mobility Open Blockchain Initiative (MOBI)
Berkeley, USA
sid.masih@berkeley.edu
Parth Singhal
Mobility Open Blockchain Initiative (MOBI)
Berkeley, USA
parthsinghal@berkeley.edu
Abstract—The automotive industry has seen an increased need
for connectivity, both as a result of the advent of autonomous
driving and the rise of connected cars and truck fleets. This
shift has led to issues such as trusted coordination and a wider
attack surface have come to light, leading to higher costs and
bureaucratic intervention . Due to the increasing adoption of
connected vehicles, as well as other connected infrastructure,
trustless peer to peer systems including blockchain are being
explored as potential solutions to this efficiency problem. All
the while, scalability is still a significant concern for industry
players. Current blockchain based systems have difficulty scaling:
Bitcoin can only process seven transactions per second (tx/s)
whereas Ethereums fifteen tx/s is not a major improvement.
Combined with the high cost of consensus and low throughput,
such platforms are unusable in the mobility sector. This paper will
address the latest advances in the field that aim to resolve parts
of this problem as well as inform its readers about the latest
scalability technologies that could push blockchain automotive
infrastructure into the mainstream. This paper will also introduce
the theoretical tools and advancements that, if implemented,
could bring the mobility industry closer toward adopting efficient,
scalable, and cost effective decentralized solutions.
I. INTRODUCTION
Recent advancements in automotive communication technologies have led connected vehicles and their infrastructures to the internet as a solution. Many automakers have
adopted cellular modems into vehicles, enabling a rich set
of infrastructure connectivity services such as ad-hoc vehicle
to everything (V2X), VANETs [1] [2], LTE-Advanced [3],
and high throughput Millimeter Wave [63] connections. This
has led to a vast number of Internet of Things (IoT) like
applications for vehicles and infrastructure including payments, enhanced infotainment, fleet management, and other
solutions, which require infrastructure or vehicle connectivity.
Consequently, these applications have resulted in a large set
of proposed and forward thinking infrastructure applications
including identity systems, peer-to peer payment systems, autonomous fleet control, and other centralized and decentralized
infrastructure. However, with each manufacturer attempting
to create different competing technologies, and with a lack
of widespread standards, the current system is uncoordinated,
non-compatible, and wasteful.
Decentralized systems have been proposed as an alternative
to share and regulate vehicular infrastructure and streamline
complex trusted single entity systems. However, current deFig. 1. Connected vehicle environment as illustrated in [62, Fig. 1]
centralized blockchain based systems such as Bitcoin and
Ethereum are unscalable [4]. . This paper performs a metaanalysis of recent scalability work that is applicable to potential mobility-focused blockchain architecture. CAP Theorem
[5] [6] suggests that a distributed system can only have two
of the three: Consistency, Availability and Partition Tolerance.
Together they form pillars of architecture for a scalable,
robust system. Our core assumptions encourage locality of
validation (consistency), toleration of network failures (partial
tolerance), as well as high transaction throughput (availability).
This paper explores the following scalability areas: network
enhancements, sharding mechanisms, relevant alternative advancements in consensus protocols, and state channels.
II. DESCRIPTION OF AUTOMOTIVE ENVIRONMENT AND
PROBLEMS
A. Vehicular Environment
Vehicles have the ability to carry larger and more powerful
hardware compared to traditional mobile devices such as
cellphones [7] [8] [9]. Furthermore, automakers and tier-1
suppliers are able to carefully control vehicle hardware as
well as directly limit access and interfaces to the hardware
and other base infrastructure. This creates a reduced attack
surface to many potential attacks that require privileged access.
arXiv:1907.02602v1 [cs.CR] 4 Jul 2019
Furthermore, it is now common for vehicles to have internet
and vehicle to vehicle (V2V) connectivity [10] [11]. This
critical fact makes decentralized systems now a possibility.
B. Current Problems
While much general scalability research has been done,
automotive network conditions present unique challenges. Factors such as network connectivity are often ignored, not addressing lossy V2X connections as well as participant mobility
often times change how a network behaves [12]. Additionally,
liveness and synchrony [13] pose difficult requirements for
temporal connections, where connectivity bounds are either
expensive [61] or can face delays and message drops. Furthermore connections often degrade at high speeds due to
limitations with radio frequency (RF) engineering. Importantly
by definition, each vehicle should be treated as mobile. For
automotive use cases, geographical changes can become a
major bottleneck for non-mobile optimized networks. As such
validator discovery and effective load balancing become significant issues. Finally, many blockchain systems are unable to
scale with Bitcoin and Ethereum’s low transaction throughput
compared to Visa’s amortized 1700 tx/s processing speed
[4]. With approximately one billion vehicles on roads as of
2019, current systems will not be able to meet throughput
requirements.
C. Liveness
Liveness [13] is defined as the ability for a transaction
to eventually be accepted by all nodes in the system. This
property is especially challenging for mobility and automotive architectures due to the physical mobility of vehicles
and potentially inconsistent network conditions described in
Section II, Part A. Additionally, the liveness of a system
determines its usability with its actual or amortized tx/s.
This determines the actual throughput of system. As such,
validator placement and connectivity play crucial roles with
ensuring system liveness. Below, Sections IV and VI (Network
Enhancements and Consensus Models) play crucial roles in
liveness.
III. NETWORK ENHANCEMENTS
A. Overview
The idea of reducing network latency between two endpoints is an established research direction in both traditional
distributed systems and decentralized systems. Such an approach for decentralized ledger systems in mobile environments can decrease orphan blocks [27] [28], two valid but
competing blocks appending to the same network. Since one
simple method of scaling is increasing the size of a block,
therefore directly increasing the number of transactions that
may be added to a block, this will result in increased time for
such a block to propagate to the entire network. Reducing the
amount of time between blocks being mined (inter-blocktime)
results in a higher chance of a fork, as not enough validator
nodes receive the new block to append, discards other incorrect
blocks. Multiple approaches have been developed to propagate
larger and more efficient blocks at a lower latency to all validators, thus decreasing the block propagation time. In essence,
network enhancements allow larger blocks to propagate faster,
thus safely increasing effective transaction throughput.
B. Relay Networks
In blockchain, relay networks are a type of content delivery
network (CDN) [29]focused on propagating blocks efficiently.
When a new block is generated, in addition to being gossiped across the existing blockchain network, the block is
broadcasted to an endpoint in the relay network. The relay
network, similar to existing CDNs, broadcasts this block to
all other network endpoints where other blockchain network
validators can receive the new block if they had not already
seen it. Relay networks usually are able to propagate blocks
faster than standard gossip protocols primarily because they
directly broadcast new blocks to listening validators. Due to
blockchains peer-to-peer nature, it is difficult for each validator
to efficiently know a large subsection of other validators to
directly broadcast information, because of network churn and
node discovery. Furthermore, a centralized relay network can
implement routing protocols to decrease latency and efficiently
route data due to its knowledge of network topography.
Current relay networks include Bitcoins Falcon, FIBRE,
Bitcoin Relay Network, and the more general Bloxroute network. Each of the aforementioned networks is a relay network,
with small efficiency differences between them. One of the
primary reasons so few relay networks exist is a result of
the network run cost and the fact that many protocols reward
validators who produce a block that is not incorporated (unlike
Bitcoin). However, this cryptoeconomic design decision is
implemented at the expense of efficiency. Of these, only
Bloxroute has designed a network that is able to be used by any
ecosystem, with ecosystem-owned peer nodes feeding blocks
into Bloxroute relay network servers and peer nodes validating
blocks as they leave the relay network. Peer nodes ensure the
Bloxroute network does not tamper with block data by feeding
and verifying test blocks.
Trusted relay networks form the majority of current
blockchain relay networks, especially in Bitcoin such as FIBRE or Falcon. Their architecture is simple and similar to existing CDN architecture, while requiring the trust of their users
that the network is not manipulating or withholding blocks.
Trustless relay networks, such as Bloxroute, are defined as a
relay network where blocks that are being propagated may be
corrupted or withheld.
Relay networks are especially useful for automotive applications since they, knowing network topography and conditions,
can broadcast blocks efficiently to and off vehicle validators
alike. This fact allows blocks to be propagated through adverse
edge network conditions via dedicated software defined and
hardware paths. Similarly, it allows geographically distant
validators to potentially allow ecosystem users to take advantage of existing closed intranets, physical lines, and software
defined networks. In essence, relay networks directly tackle
high latency and latency variation, both contributing factors
to orphaned blocks and forks in an automotive blockchain
ecosystem. [30], and the more general Bloxroute network.
Each of these networks is a relay network, with small efficiency differences between them. One of the primary reasons
so few relay networks exist is due to the cost of running
them and the fact that many protocols reward validators who
produce a block that is not incorporated (unlike Bitcoin). However, this cryptoeconomic design decision is at the expense of
efficiency. Of these, only Bloxroute has designed a network
that is able to be used by any ecosystem with ecosystemowned peer nodes feeding blocks into Bloxroute relay network
servers and peer nodes validating blocks as they leave the relay
network. Peer nodes ensure the Bloxroute network does not
tamper with block data by feeding and verifying test blocks.
C. Cut Through Routing
Cut through routing, such as seen in Bloxroute and the
Falcon Network, is a networking optimization that begins
retransmitting a block as soon as the first frames of information
have arrived. This approach is especially effective at reducing latency due to increasing blocksizes seen in blockchain
networks, such as one megabyte for Bitcoin. By transmitting
block data once it arrives and before the entire block is
received, each node-to-node links latency is reduced. This
latency loss is especially evident for nodes that are the furthest
from where the original block was created. For automotive
use-cases, such a technique can be directly embedded into
any protocol, reducing the time needed for large blocks to
propagate through vehicles and other players.
D. Unreliable Transport With Correction Codes
Nodes with high latency can partition networks and lead to
an increase of forks. The use of reliable transport protocols
like TCP can potentially adversely affect latency, due to the
acknowledging or ACKing data that has been reliably transferred. Some protocols like FIBRE use unreliable transport
protocols like UDP in conjunction with error correction codes
to transmit large blocks through networks, in an effort to
optimize for latency decreases. This protocol is popular with
high bandwidth but high latency links, such as those across
continents, in which FIBRE is heavily employed. Furthermore,
this technique is being applied through Googles QUIC protocol [65] in libp2p [64] which powers protocols like IPFS [66]
as well as Ethereum 2.0 (Serenity) [34].
E. Transaction Caching
One major inefficiency with propagating blocks is that
validator nodes may have existing transactions that were
incorporated into the block being broadcasted. As such, as
those validators receive the new block, transaction data may
be repeated leading to more information than necessary being
sent. BIP 152 (Compact Blocks) [69] is a released patch where
validators can receive a block template containing transaction
identifying information and incorporating local transactions
into the block. Any transaction not locally present is then
downloaded from the validator node which gave the block
template. As such, only required information is downloaded
between nodes, leading to less information being propagated
through the network.
IV. SHARDING
A. Introduction
Sharding is a blockchain concept where each validator only
processes a subset of transactions and/or stores a subset of the
global chain. Nodes that maintain a shard maintain information
only on that shard while some mechanism exists for handing
intershard transactions, which is an active research problem.
This phenomenon allows different subsets of validator nodes
to split different portions of the global state using the same
amount of resources. However, sharding often comes at the
cost of compromising trust, usually with the objective of
corrupting a single shard. For example, a non-sharded chain
with a number of validators agrees to hard-fork into a sharded
chain, and splits that number of validators across ten shards,
each shard now only has that number of validators divided
by the number of shards. This means corrupting one shard
only requires corrupting 5.1% or 51%
10 of the total number
of validators, or usually 33% if practical byzantine fault
tolerance style consensus (PBFT) based. However, this is
usually only dangerous if the validator distribution mechanism
is not random. Almost all sharding designs today rely on some
source of randomness to assign validators to shards. Note that
sharding is usually a protocol layer scalability enhancement
even though its goal is to improve network efficiency and
locality proximity. Sharding is a major architecture detail for
many protocols such as Near Protocol and Serenity. Sharding
plays a critical role in increasing throughput for Ethereums
slow throughput, as seen in Serenity.
Sharding is typically characterized by its quadratic beSharding is typically characterized by its quadratic behavior, that
is an increase of throughput in each shard multiplicatively
increases the total throughput. Sharding, in its simplest sense,
is characterized by Vitalik Bulterins scaling by a thousand
alt-coins [33] where small chains of various ecosystems all
provide services for their specific users, this approach is taken
by Cosmos [70] and their Cosmos hub as well as Polkadot
[71]. The primarily challenge of sharding is the ability to
integrate cross-shard transactions to give the appearance of
one large system. Finally, sharding protocols are usually
characterized by beacon chains [32] or inter-shard committees
which maintain and govern the shards. Beacon chains also can
significantly affect performance due to their inter-shard nature,
however they play a critical role with validator assignment,
randomness generation, and other inter-shard governance requirements. A temporary epoch based version of a beacon
chain is called a committee or inter-shard committee, where
normal validators may be chosen to join this committee.
B. Sharding Architecture and Inter-Shard Consensus
All sharding protocols are designed to increase transaction
throughput rates by dividing the ecosystem into shards that
handle transactions within each shard followed by usually
some global consensus to achieve state consistency. With automotive and mobility being naturally geographically distributed,
the need for sharding becomes apparent. We illustrate this
scalability method by example through Elastico, a rotating
shard based sharding protocol. As the number of validators in
Elastico increases, its transaction rates are expected to increase
as well. Specifically, Elasticos design allows its transaction
rates to approximately double with every few hundred nodes
added to its network [40]. Transaction sharding must address
four main laterals:
1) Validator identification and shard formation
2) Shard leader discovery
3) Intra-shard consensus
4) Inter-shard consensus and final block broadcast
Upon joining, a network of potential validators must be
assigned to a shard. Elastico does this by having potential
validators solve a proof of work style verification puzzle
to prevent Sybil attacks. After each validator is assigned a
shard based on the last, the protocol begins an epoch, or
set interval of time, for each shard to exist. Within each
shard, Elastico [40] processes each transaction by using PBFT
[44]. It is important to note that any form of consensus can
be used. After the epoch finishes, each shard synchronizes
global state over another round of PBFT. Elastico introduces
randomness by assigning each validator node randomly to a
new shard and repeating the process over. Note that there are
many other consensus mechanisms that can be used at this
stage. Near Protocol [35] uses a directed acyclic graph (DAG)
to link intershard transactions. This randomness is a crucial
factor in preventing byzantine fault for PBFT consensus based
protocols, where a fewer number of validator nodes within
each shard collude to unfairly manipulate transactions.
Example protocols in this dual PBFT style are Near Protocol, Zilliqa [36], RapidChain [37], Elastico which first
introduced the overall approach, and OmniLedger [38]. OmniLedger is a general efficiency and security improvement
over Elastico, with the caveat of not having validator reassignment after an epoch. OmniLedger justified this by having
a large enough shard, that ”one-third” attack become difficult.
RapidChain is a general efficiency improvement and offers a
decentralized bootstrapping method for initial network genesis.
Next, Ziliqa uses a novel signature generation scheme over the
other protocols. Finally, Near Protocol uses a directed acyclic
graph (DAG) to mitigate orphan block problems between
shards due to latency and other network factors, allowing it to
mint new blocks faster. Prysmatic Labs uses a similar approach
to Near, but implementing their work as a separate protocol
based on Serenity [34].
C. Static Sharding
Static sharding randomly assigns validators to shards and
does not reassign them for the duration the validator in
question is active. Validators may leave and rejoin a network
to go through the assignment process again. One major benefit
to this approach is the additional latency faced at the end of
an epoch due to shard reassignment is automatically mitigated
allowing for continuous network activity. A major flaw with
this approach is the fact that malicious validators have a
smaller pool of validators to corrupt. A malicious entity –
should they be able to predict shard assignments – would
know where potentially hostile validators would be assigned.
For many PBFT or BFT based protocols, which generally
have one third fault tolerance, this fact lowers the target
shard’s minimum corrupt faulty validators to a third of the
number of validators divided by the number of shards. As
such, strong randomization and fewer shards are necessary.
Fewer shards ensure that more validators are assigned to
each shard resulting in a malicious actor needing to corrupt
more validators. OmniLedger uses initial random validator
assignment and increases the number of validators for each
shard. This architecture choice allows for more resilient shards
with lower failure rates. Additionally, network enhancement
protocols can be paired with static sharding to route messages
to validator nodes more efficiently. Near Protocol also uses a
form of static sharding. Static sharding is especially useful for
automotive and mobility usecases, such as the identity usecase, due to the reliance on fewer but larger shards. As such,
static sharding has poor performance where data intensive
throughput or high transactions are needed.
D. Epoch Shard Rotation
Most sharding protocols feature epoch based rotated validator sets. After a predefined epoch ends, the beacon chain reassigns validators to new shards and then transactions resume.
One major benefit of this property is that predicting which
shard a validator will be assigned to becomes as difficult as
predicting the randomness protocol that governs assignment.
However, this feature is at the expense of latency with the
entire system not being available to process new transactions
during validator assignment. For continuous or real time applications that require constant system availability, this system
would not naively be applicable. However, for any other
applications which tolerate predicted though not necessarily
bounded delays, such a system is applicable. Examples of
epoch based shard rotation protocols include Elastico, Zilliqa,
Ethereum Serenity, and RapidChain. One major problem with
epoch based shard rotations is the associated system freeze
time when an epoch ends. However pipelining random values
sufficientily solves this problem, as seen in Ethereum Serenity’s RANDAO [68].
E. Randomness in Sharding
One of the major responsibilities assigned to beacon chains
or inter-shard committees is randomness generation. Randomness makes guessing ”behavior” more difficult, probabilistically reducing many attacks such as the 1
3
fault tolerance
attack in PBFT protocols and 51% attack in proof of work
consensus style protocols. A variety of randomness inducing
methods exist specifically for sharding. OmniLedger, a major static sharding based protocol, uses RandHound [42], a
multiparty computation protocol (MPC), to deliver byzantine
fault tolerant randomness. Elastico uses a distributed commit
and xor scheme. Other protocols use the output of previous
steps in randomness generation. Zilliqa uses the output of a
proof of work nonce to assign validators to shards. Serenity
uses verifiable delay function based randomness within their
beacon chain through a decentralized autonomous organization (RANDAO) [68]. Serenity additionally pipelines backup
RANDAO values to prevent system stall as discussed in the
previous subsection.
F. State Sharding
1) State Splitting: Sharding transactions is not enough
to ensure data efficiency, due to the need for state to be
stored such that it is consistent throughout the entire sharded
system. Some protocols, like Zilliqa, ignore state sharding
completely, at the benefit of not needing to implement intershard transactions. However, most protocols implement state
sharding such that most validator nodes only store transactions
that affect transactions processed by that shard. Most nonpolynomial encoded state sharding protocols do not share state
among all shards, meaning a ledger of all transactions is not
stored at each validator. However, network consistency must
be able to be proved at the inter-shard level. Elastico stores
transaction data for only transactions that occurred within the
shard. However, the Merkle roots from each shard are merged
by way of a cryptographic hash function by the inter-shard
committee. This allows a validator to verify state at any time
by requesting each shard’s Merkle root from that epoch and rerun the hash function to recreate the inter-shard’s committee’s
value for that epoch. The primary benefit for such an approach
is that each shard only keeps data relevant to transactions
within or affecting accounts or other state data within a shard.
The vast majority of protocols follow this template with where
only relevant shard data.
2) Inter-Shard Consensus: One major challenge with split
state shards is resolving transactions that affect more than
one shard, due to the fact that transactions affect two distinct
processing divisions. Elastico, like most other sharding protocols asynchronously executes inter-shard transactions with
each transaction partially occurring within relevant shards.
There are two main approaches to this problem. The less
used synchronous method where cross shard transactions are
simultaneously coordinated and executed by both blocks of
the two shards in question. The asynchronous method where
the two shards asynchronously execute transactions but rely
on one shard demonstrating a transaction executed for the
other shard to execute the transaction, with this approach being
primarily used for its flexibility and lack of forcing the two
shards to synchronize in parallel , preserving performance.
The train and hotel problem specified by Andrew Miller [33]
highlights the general template of asynchronous cross-shard
transactions, where transactions are modelled through dependency graphs with shards executing dependencies first. Serenity, Elastico, and most protocols use this approach. One major
future direction is the incorporation of ZK-STARKS and ZKSNARKS [33] to create receipts of dependencies executed and
thereby allowing the next dependency to proceed. However,
most current ZK-STARK and ZK-SNARK implementations
are slow resulting in excessive latency leading to inter-shard
consensus being an area of active research. Especially for
mobility, being able to tolerate inter-shard transactions with
reasonably high throughput is important where user shard
assignment is executed randomly.
3) Polynomial Erasure Data Coding: Polynomial encoding
and erasure codes permit data to be recovered given enough
points for reconstruction. Such an approach can be used for
efficiently encoding past transaction data and creating enough
data shards such that data reconstruction can be done given
node failure. We use Polyshard [40] to illustrate polynomial
encoding based state sharding, an efficient method for state
sharding. Note that as of now, Polyshard and erasure coding
from Serenity are the only significant public works in the field.
Polyshard mitigates the previously described issue with each
node storing and computing on a coded shard of the same size
that is generated by linearly mixing uncoded shards, using
the Lagrange polynomial function. This function provides
computational redundancy as well as provides security against
erroneous results from malicious nodes, enabled by noisy
polynomial interpolation techniques, through Reed-Solomon
encoding. This sort of encoding is similarly extended to
Serenity’s related data availability usecase, which will incorporate erasure codes for data availability for fraud proofs [41];
this use exemplifies the compactness of polynomial encoding
allowing even light clients greater capacity to participate.
While polynomial encoding is generally applicable in many
distributed computing scenarios, the following two salient
features make PolyShard and by polynomial encoded state
sharding particularly suitable for blockchain systems in mobility:
1) Oblivious: The coding strategy applied to generate coded
shards is independent of the verification function. That
implies that the same encoded data can be simultaneously used for multiple verification items (for example:
digital signature verification and balance verification in
a payment system)
2) Incremental: PolyShard allows each node to grow its
local coded shard by coding over the newest verified
blocks, without needing to access the previous ones.
This helps maintain a constant coding overhead as the
chain grows, allowing scalable and secure solutions to
be utilized.
State sharding is critical factor to scaling storage. Bitcoin,
one of the few large-scale blockchain systems, currently
requires a full 185 gigabytes of current blocks to be stored
on each full validator node. In a mobile environment with
theoretically one billion vehicular participants, state sharding,
similar to Polyshard, ensures that every validator does not have
to contain the full set of all blocks and capacity grows with
each node joining the network. This allows validation to be
decoupled, due to storage constraints, from large data centers
to other potential actors within a mobile ecosystem, such as
vehicles themselves. It can be a powerful tool to allow other
mobile ecosystem players to have control or simply reduce
storage costs.
G. Automotive Sharding Analysis
1) Data Efficiency: Sharding transactions does not natively
solve the space constraint issue. Since the entire network must
be able to reach consensus, as dictated by network safety,
each validator will usually contain the entire networks history.
Approaches such as state sharding can be used to solve this
issue. For automotive architecture, this is critical to storage
management since most vehicles do not have the capacity
to have large datacenter like storage capabilities. Even if
validators are constrained to non-vehicles, failing to scale data
storage with shard division as in Zilliqa’s approach would
result in unnecessary data replication and would result in a
highly inefficient network.
2) Shard Latency: Additionally, intra-shard consensus may
slow down confirmation times for transactions that took place
between two shards, as seen in the Near protocol. This delay
is unavoidable, though possibly mitigated by grouping participants who commonly exchange commit transactions with
each-other together in the same shard. The key to automotive
is the exchange between validator assignment randomness and
latency. For example, a validator may be physically far away
such that the latency delay between a network participant and
validator may become too high, especially for mission critical
tasks. Potential approaches include creating smaller shards and
pseudo-randomness such that validators are always within an
exact or estimated latency bound. However, such a scheme or
similar schemes allow potential validators to narrow, sometimes significantly the set of network participants they will
be serving, introducing potential crypto-economic risks. Many
other approaches such as using a class of semi-trusted verifiers
or various staking mechanisms may be appropriate to mitigate
risks.
V. CONSENSUS MODELS
Consensus models form the heart of any automotive
blockchain system, providing the final agreement of global
state. While consensus has been a major distributed systems
topic for years, Nakamoto style consensus [16] (longest chain
consensus) was the first major blockchain focused consensus
protocol. However, its inefficiency due to its reliance on proof
of work [43] led to a resurgent focus on practical byzantine
fault tolerant consensus (PBFT) [44]. BFT’s key difference is
prioritizing consistency of transactions over system availability
as in Nakamoto style systems. Tendermint [18] and Algorand
[19] were among the first widely known PBFT protocols
introduced. However, PBFT algorithms, due to the ”voting”
structure of this class of consensus algorithms, are more
susceptible to issues of liveness due to network issues. In
automotive use-cases, the commonality of arbitrary network
delays, expensive data transfer costs, temporal connections,
as well as mobile ecosystem players introduce difficulties
for many current consensus mechanisms used to stable static
validators and ecosystem agents.
A. Directed Acyclic Graphs
Directed acyclic graphs (DAGs) present a relevant solution
to directly tackling the orphan block problem [49], a major
issue for automotive due to variable latencies associated with
validation on-board vehicles. DAGs do not directly influence
a systems scalability, instead DAGs are a data structure
replacement to the chain data structure seen in most other
protocols. By allowing orphan blocks that are incorporated
into the DAG, direct scalability methods such as increasing
block size, allowing more collections to be processed for the
block period, or simply increasing the block creation rate.
Note that the vast majority of DAG based protocols still
require partial synchronicity, guaranteeing that messages are
eventually delivered through the network even if the upper
bound delay is not directly known. This particular factor makes
DAGs especially suitable for mobility and automotive based
use-cases, where higher changes of network partitioning and
delay are likely to happen. One major drawback to DAGs
is the difficulty in calculating the probability of transaction
reversal due to non-linearity. Additionally DAGs are prone
to network inconsistency due to blocks not being propagated
network wide before a conflicting transaction may occur.
1) Heaviest Path: The most similar DAG analogue protocol
to Bitcoin’s blockchain using Nakamoto style consensus is the
Ghost protocol [49]. Similar to Bitcoin style blockchain, where
the longest observed chain is mined on by honest validators,
Ghost encourages miners, using Nakamoto style proof of work
mining, to append blocks onto the heaviest observed subtree in
the DAG. Each time a validator receives the entire DAG, the
validator traverses the entire DAG choosing the path with the
heaviest weight. In Nakamoto style consensus, this translates
to the subtree with the most nodes linked. Essentially, this is
the subtree where the most mining was previously completed.
Safety is achieved based on the same principle of Bitcoin’s
blockchain, being that in the time it takes for the newly minted
block to propagate through the entire network the validator will
either have received a new valid block or every node in the
network will have received the original minted block.
2) Vote Ordering: Building on Ghost is the Spectre protocol
[50]. Spectre’s primary novel contribution is the ability to
find a ground truth in transactions by relying on transactional
precedence of a DAG’s voted on topological sort. The primary
benefit of DAGs and chains is that both can be reduced to a
distinct ordering of transactions, which in turn ensures that
no new transaction can conflict with a previous transaction.
Spectre as a consensus mechanism has each validator vote
on the topological sort of the DAG, therefore ensuring a
consistent state. Transactions are still processed and added
onto the DAG the same way Ghost protocol does so. The
decoupling of mining and transaction consensus allows Spectre
to process far more transactions on the network. One of
the primary issues with Spectre is that the voting protocol
does not inherently ensure that the topological sort is valid,
since the ordering itself is voted on rather than the DAGs
structure. This issue more practically manifests itself with the
fact that transactions cannot be strongly ordered, resulting in
Ethereum Virtual Machine (EVM) style transactions not being
possible. As such, this platform is not ideal for automotive usecases, where many complex transactions are not commutative.
However, in some use-cases where transactions do not require
strict order, Spectre provides an exceptionally simple and fast
DAG paradigm. By switching the proof of work mechanism
with a more efficient stake based system, a reasonable and
simple mobility focused protocol could be built.
3) Node Clustering: Phantom [51] builds on Spectre by removing voting based consensus in favor of calculating the correct path from leaf to root of blocks. This method, while more
computationally expensive, ensures that the DAG’s acyclic
integrity is always maintained and enforces a strict ordering
of transactions, thereby allowing complex non-commutative
transactions. State correctness is achieved by calculating the
maximum k sized cluster sub-DAG. This sub-DAG colloquially is the set of blocks where for any block the number of
paths to and from that said block is bounded by k. In essence,
it prioritizes the portion of the DAG that is more connected
and therefore less susceptible to attacks like chain holding. The
newly minted block then connects all leaves in the k cluster
sub-DAG further penalizing chain withholding validators. Note
that the k clustering problem is NP-hard and therefore an
approximation is used to estimate this set of blocks. As such,
transaction precedence and correctness can then be calculated
by topologically sorting the ”correct” portion of the DAG and
checking for transaction conflicts, rejecting new transactions
that conflict. This DAG method is particularly suitable for
complex transactions involving automotive use-cases due to
the ability to include non-commutative transactions. As with
Spectre, the protocol in the paper uses proof of work, however
this may be switched with other stake based systems if adapted
for use in larger automotive systems. One major drawback
with Phantom is that it explicitly penalizes validators with high
network latency due to their ability to be less ”connected” then
validators with lower latencies who are able to reference more
blocks in time. The Inclusive protocol [52] from the same
authors introduces a novel mechanism called the ”Inclusive
Game” which relies on fees to incentivize transactions to be
rationally non-conflicting while still allowing more transactions to be included in the DAG. This replaces the k cluster
algorithm in Phantom.
4) Federated Byzantine Agreement DAGs: Another novel
variation of using DAGs in consensus protocols is the
Avalanche family [53] (Avalanche, Snowball, Snowflake, and
Slush). Similar to Spectre, Avalanche utilizes vote based
ground truth which is sampled from other validators. The
Snowball portion of the paper introduces the idea of calculating confidence in some state, visualized as a coloring
of a node, to be one of two colors. The network is randomly sampled until confidence is passively voted on based
on another node’s states. This fact additionally establishes
leaderless passive consensus, negating the need for complex
vote based rounds and message passing which can be risky
liveness-wise for many automotive based blockchain usecases, due to the reliance on a round leader. Avalanche builds
on snowflake by storing this confidence of a transaction
by storing a transaction’s confidence in a block in a DAG
structure. The strength of a transaction is determined by
validating all previous transactions that are reachable through
the DAG structure. This can be seen as the same as ensuring
that all previous transactions that led to the current state are
correct therefore this transaction is correct by not conflicting
a previous transaction. Block generation is done by pooling
a set of transactions waiting to be confirmed into the same
block then running the correctness validation protocol. One
of Avalanches greatest strengths is its efficiency, achieving
up to 1300 tx/s compared to 364 tx/s with Algorand when
tested in a single EC2 cluster with 2000 validators and
negligible network latency. Additionally, by negating the need
for consistent proof of state or proof of work (a benefit of
leaderless protocols), Avalanche achieves 10−9 probability of
an adversarial transaction being accepted, similar to proof of
stake based Algorand’s 5x10−9 with 20% of Byzantine nodes
[19]. When paired with a strong validator identity mechanism,
though not required, Avalanche makes a strong automotive
and mobility network case, where honest transactions are
guaranteed commitment in conditions similar to other PBFT
style protocols and efficiency due to the lack of formalized
round based voting. One current issue with Avalanche is that
the paper does not specify how parent transactions should
be chosen, resulting in potentially controversial transactions
never being voted on and approved. This issue is a result of
new transactions being built on validated old transactions. A
sufficient parent selection algorithm would mitigate this flaw.
In summary, DAGs due to their tolerance for network delays
leading to orphaned blocks can form a strong latency tolerant
part of any protocol for automotive use cases.
B. Optimistic Path
Optimistic Path style consensus achieves consensus by
combining a fast, asynchronous path with instant transaction
confirmations with a fully synchronous fall-back path, which
the system falls back to if transactions are disputed. This
architecture provides a simple paradigm that in adversarial
conditions is as robust as most synchronous protocols [54], yet
when given a super majority of honest validators optimistically
confirms transactions. Optimistic path consensus remains resilient assuming only that a majority of the computing power
is controlled by honest players. Optimistically when 3
4
of the
computing power is controlled by honest players, a special
player called the accelerator is used to confirm and append
transactions instantaneously, bounded only by the message
delay in the network. Additionally, it can be shown that the
3
4
optimistic bound is tight for protocols that are resilient
assuming only an honest majority. Thunderella [54] is an
example of a protocol that employs optimistic path consensus.
Optimistic path consensus is especially beneficial where an
ecosystem has a heuristic determining that participants usually
will act honestly. However, an overly hostile or cheating
ecosystem will be greatly inefficient under this system. For
systems where external knowledge is known about validators
and participants, such as automotive, and where a strong
heuristic can be applied, optimistic path consensus remains an
efficient option which effectively utilizes external environment
information in its heuristic.
C. Hardware Trusted Execution Environments
Hardware based trusted execution environment (TEE) and
their associated protocols represent a distinct set of benefits
and potential drawbacks for automotive use-cases. Hardware
based TEEs, such as Intel Corporation’s SGX (software guard
extension) launched with 2015 with their sixth generation
Skylake family [14], offer aTEE implemented in hardware
as opposed to an OS’s kernel or application running on an
OS. SGX offers hardware isolated memory for applications
that utilize them, even protecting against a malicious kernel.
This practically allows the storage of secrets in memory.
An interface abstraction allows the use of special machine
code commands to marshal and un-marshal data between the
enclave and un-trusted program. However, any single flaw
in the enclave renders the entire system compromised, with
attacks such as the spectre attack [55] famously exploiting an
efficiency mechanism in the CPU while using unprivileged
access (non-kernel access) to dump enclave contents into
unprotected memory. Flaws in SGX are difficult to fix if
they cannot be patched using firmware due to the necessity
of replacing the full CPU. However for automotive use-cases
where tier one suppliers and automakers completely control
hardware and its servicing, such mistakes may be easier to
replace and manage. For this reason, hardware based TEEs
like SGX make a compelling case for automotive adoption.
Exploiting SGX’s memory isolation is Intel’s novel Proof
of Elapsed Time (PoET) protocol [57]. It extends traditional
Nakamoto style consensus, mimicking proof of work with a
timer run in an SGX TEE. Rather than continuously hashing
values to solve the cryptographic puzzle traditionally seen in
Nakamoto consensus, POET has validators generate a random
number representing the time before the current block can
be mined. The validator with the lowest wait time mines
and broadcasts the block before the other validators with the
process then restarting. One major flaw with this protocol
is that it requires every validator to prove their identity and
that they have the appropriate SGX settings enabled. As such,
this consensus protocol is only possible on ecosystems where
identity is guaranteed with a strong probability. For automotive
applications this guarantee may be acceptable due to the strict
control of vehicle identity and hardware, however it poses a
limiting factor where identity control is not possible. POET is
implemented in Hyperledger Sawtooth, which in turn is part
of the greater Hyperledger ecosystem.
Ekiden [56] builds on hardware based TEEs by eschewing POET/Nakamoto consensus completely. Instead Ekiden
decouples code execution with consensus, running logical
code inside the SGX TEE which in turn passes a proof of
publication. A process flow for Ekiden has a smart contract
[56] submitted to an execution node which contains the TEE
which publishes the contract to a consensus node which
appends the contract onto the blockchain. Should a smart
contract be activated, the compute node again processes the
smart contract information and then publishes any resultant
state changes to the consensus nodes which in turn update the
blockchain.
D. Round Pipelining
Round pipelining refers to having two different round’s
data stored on the same message broadcasted to the entire
set of validator nodes. This simple pipelining mechanism is
succinctly discussed in detail in PaLa [58], a simple PBFT
protocol that implements pipelining. Pipelining is especially
useful as a simple efficiency boost, due to the ability to run
more than one round concurrently over the same network
messaged passed to and from the leader of a round. As of
this paper’s publication, there is no evaluation of protocol. An
implemented protocol which uses round pipelining is Dora
[67], one that extends Tendermints’s PBFT consensus protocol [18] Tendermint with pipelining. While the overarching
concept remains the same, the specifics of implementation
for each protocol remain unique to the underlying consensus
mechanism as seen in Dora and PaLa.
VI. STATE CHANNELS
Application layer scalability protocols such as state channels
and Ethereum’s Plasma [25] are unique from the other methods
discussed in this paper as they exist above any network
or protocol level enhancement. As such, they are platform
agnostic and far more generalizable than the other approaches
discussed. However this generalizability comes at a technical
trade-off for usability and complexity. State channels are particularly useful for deposits used over time without withdrawal.
However, many use cases such as automotive payments or
products involving a temporal recurring fee make attractive
applications of state channels.
State channels at their most basic form allow two users to
lock tokens or other stateful components, as in Counterfactual
[72], into a smart contract and maintain an off chain ledger
between the two users of active transactions only between
those two users. Once the users deem an epoch finished,
they both sign a final ”state” of the ledger and submit this
ledger as a final transaction signed by both parties to the smart
contract which disperses tokens or components on-chain. This
simple paradigm forms the base of all state channel networks
such as the Lightning Network [23] for Bitcoin and Raiden
Network [24] for Ethereum. The ledger kept between two
participants can also generalized to any multi-agent object,
with the smart contract needing to be able to transform this
object into a specific payout between two participants [60].
This paradigm also highlights one of the greatest drawbacks of
state channel based systems, state channels are only efficient
if there exists a significant number of transactions between
two parties. Should both parties constantly close an active
contract and form new contracts, the system devolves into a
large set of on-chain transactions removing the highly scalable
off chain advantage. Both Lightning and Raiden attempt
to mitigate this architecture problem by constructing more
complex state channel networks such as multi-hop and hub
and spoke channel systems [23] [59]. Both approaches rely on
a network of participants who have active contracts with each
other. When a transaction needs to be made from participant
A to B, a path of nodes from A to B such that each node
has enough tokens staked for each adjacent node in that path.
With this path B generates a secret and its hash and passes
the hash to A. A then gives a payment promise and the hash
the first node in the path which is then propagated all the way
to B, with B then passing the original secret the other way up
the chain allowing the path to fulfill payments.
One of the most apparent difficulties with such a system
is ensuring connectivity between participants. Hub and spoke
architecture was developed [59] to minimize the length of
paths and ensure connectivity by using a few fully connected
hubs to all users such as seen in Finality Labs [59], however
the overall process flow involves significant potential latency
related to messaging and path discovery. Furthermore, state
channel directional architecture plays the greatest role in
efficiency. Participants in the hub and spoke model must
initially be willing to stake tokens and stateful components
and hold them in that contract for a period of time. For
automotive usecases, this is of particular interest involving
payment usecases where money is initially deposited and used
over time without withdrawal. In particular, multiple hubs
offer a way for transactions over a defined epoch to offer the
same decentralized and cryptographic guarantees as normal
blockchain transactions directly built on a protocol without the
need for consensus until an epoch is over. For this reason, state
channels offer the most attractive path for payment systems
should hub and spoke architecture be implemented correctly
with high enough liquidity.
VII. SCALABILITY USE-CASE APPLICATIONS
We now explore applications of the discussed scalability
techniques. Note that section is a small and not exhaustive
list, with many other use-cases existing.
A. Payments
The peer-to-peer payments use case involves any sort of
payment to and from vehicles to other vehicles and infrastructure. Due to the simplicity and need for almost real time
confirmations, hub based state channel architecture allows
rapid payments between participants without the need to
constantly update the underlying blockchain state. Without
explicitly forcing consensus except at the end of an epoch
a high degree of efficiency is achieved with only nodes along
the payment path explicitly being involved.
B. Ownership and Identity Management
Ownership tracking and identity management are both proposed solutions toward creating a fully digital and decentralized method for tracking ownership and identity, replacing the
patchwork of systems currently used. One important caveat
is that state consistency is important, with slow propagated
state updates resulting in incorrect permissions. Such a system
would greatly benefit from the routing enhancements discussed
in Section III, enabling light clients to quickly gain access to
updated information and therefore maintain state. With faster
state propagation, ownership and identity solution can now
interact with ecosystem players near real time, depending on
implementation.
C. Black Box Data Sharing and Processing
Black box data sharing and processing refers to a general
class of applications that allow different entities to share
data or process data from another organization. Suggested
automotive applications involve granular driving habit analysis for dynamic insurance premiums as well as distributed
autonomous vehicle training. Ekiden’s SGX based compute
nodes execute smart contract code on the particular node in
question then prove correct execution on chain. One of the
biggest benefits for this model is efficiency, allowing complex
algorithms to be run on local data without requiring every
compute node to run the same instructions. Furthermore, data
would never physically be transferred to a requestor’s systems,
allowing for more private systems and potentially making
regulatory compliance more simple. As such TEE hardware
provides a clear improvement with regards to scalability and
privacy.
VIII. CONCLUSION
Blockchain scalability is one of the greatest hurdles preventing its usage in the modern automotive and, more generally, the
mobility sector. However, a balance or compromise according
to the application specific requirements can be made in order to exploit blockchain in specific circumstances. Scaling
blockchain systems that require sending and processing large
amounts of data should allow some degree of compromised
security and centralization with a blockchain based protocol
can be designed accordingly. Similarly if user necessities are
different such that increased adversarial conditions is needed,
the protocols can similarly be changed. For example, Rippless
network may be able to achieve better scalability, but it comes
with increased centralization and additional issues like rotated
trusted validators. Bitcoin Cash, on the other hand, boosted
scalability by raising blocksize limits, but the higher blocksize
limits may compromise the security of the network. Ensuring
scalability with appropriately chosen security modeling is
the only way for blockchain technology to be accepted for
automotive use cases.
REFERENCES
[1] H. Hartenstein and L. P. Laberteaux, ”A tutorial survey on vehicular ad
hoc networks,” in IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 46, no. 6, pp.
164-171, June 2008.
[2] R. Brendha and V. S. J. Prakash, ”A survey on routing protocols for
vehicular Ad Hoc networks,” 2017 4th International Conference on
Advanced Computing and Communication Systems (ICACCS), Coimbatore, 2017, pp. 1-7.
[3] S. Schwarz, J. C. Ikuno, M. imko, M. Taranetz, Q. Wang and M. Rupp,
”Pushing the Limits of LTE: A Survey on Research Enhancing the
Standard,” in IEEE Access, vol. 1, pp. 51-62, 2013.
[4] M Rudlang, ”Comparative Analysis of Bitcoin and Ethereum” June 2017
[5] A. Fox, E. A. Brewer, ”Harvest yield and scalable tolerant systems”,
Hot Topics in Operating Systems 1999. Proceedings of the Seventh
Workshop on, pp. 174-178, 1999.
[6] E. A. Brewer, ”Towards robust distributed systems”, PODC, vol. 7, 2000.
[7] Jiao Yu and B. M. Wilamowski, ”Recent advances in in-vehicle embedded systems,” IECON 2011 - 37th Annual Conference of the IEEE
Industrial Electronics Society, Melbourne, VIC, 2011, pp. 4623-4625.
[8] P. Cuenot et al., ”Managing Complexity of Automotive Electronics
Using the EAST-ADL,” 12th IEEE International Conference on Engineering Complex Computer Systems (ICECCS 2007), Auckland, 2007,
pp. 353-358.
[9] P. Waszecki, P. Mundhenk, S. Steinhorst, M. Lukasiewycz, R. Karri
and S. Chakraborty, ”Automotive Electrical and Electronic Architecture
Security via Distributed In-Vehicle Traffic Monitoring,” in IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems,
vol. 36, no. 11, pp. 1790-1803, Nov. 2017.
[10] G. Karagiannis et al., ”Vehicular Networking: A Survey and Tutorial on
Requirements, Architectures, Challenges, Standards and Solutions,” in
IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 584-616,
Fourth Quarter 2011.
[11] A. Nshimiyimana, D. Agrawal and W. Arif, ”Comprehensive survey of
V2V communication for 4G mobile and wireless technology,” 2016 International Conference on Wireless Communications, Signal Processing
and Networking (WiSPNET), Chennai, 2016, pp. 1722-1726.
[12] M. Giordani, A. Zanella, T. Higuchi, O. Altintas, M. Zorzi. ”On
the Feasibility of Integrating mmWave and IEEE 802.11p for V2V
Communications”, 2018
[13] A. Gauba, A. Krishnan, Z. Koticha, M. Uddin, M. Mohavedi ”A MetaAnalysis of Proposed Alternative Consensus Protocols for Blockchains”,
2018
[14] [Online] Available: https://software.intel.com/ sites/default/
files/managed/48/88/329298-002.pdf
[15] M. Azizian, S. Cherkaoui and A. S. Hafid, ”Vehicle Software Updates
Distribution with SDN and Cloud Computing,” in IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 55, no. 8, pp. 74-79, Aug. 2017.
[16] S. Nakamoto ”Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System”
[17] G. Wood ”Ethereum: A Secure Decentralized Generalized Transaction
Ledger Byzantium Version 69351d5”, 2018
[18] E. Buchman ”Tendermint: Byzantine Fault Tolerance in the Age of
Blockchains”, 2016
[19] Y. Gilad, R. Hemo, S. Micali, G. Vlachos, N. Zeldovich ”Algorand:
Scaling Byzantine Agreements for Cryptocurrencies”
[20] J. R. Douceur. ”The Sybil attack”, in Proceedings of the 1st International
Workshop on Peer-to-Peer Systems (IPTPS 02), Cambridge, MA, Mar.
2002.
[21] [Online] BitcoinWiki. Proof of stake. Available:
https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Proof of Stake, 2017
[22] [Online] BitcoinWiki. Bitcoin scalability. Available:
https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Scalability, 2017.
[23] J. Poon, T. Dryja ”The Bitcoin Lightning Network: Scalable Off-Chain
Instant Payments”, 2016
[24] [Online] Raiden Network 101, Available:
https://raiden.network/101.html
[25] J. Poon, V. Buterin, ”Plasma: Scalable Autonomous Smart Contracts”,
2017
[26] R. Pass, L. Seeman, A. Shelat, ”Analysis of the Blockchain Protocol in
Asynchronous Networks”, 2016
[27] [Online] BitcoinWiki. Orphan Block. Available:
https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Orphan Block, 2018
[28] J. Gbel, H.P. Keeler, A.E. Krzesinski, P.G. Taylor ”Bitcoin Blockchain
Dynamics: the Selfish-Mine Strategy in the Presence of Propagation
Delay”, 2015
[29] A.M.K. Pathan, R. Buyya, ”A Taxonomy and Survey of Content
Delivery Networks”, 2006
[30] A.E. Gencer, S. Basu, I. Eyal, R. Van Renesse, E.G. Sirer, ”Decentralization in Bitcoin and Ethereum” Networks”
[31] U. Klarman, S. Basu, A. Kuzmanovic, E.G. Sirer, ”bloXroute: A
Scalable Trustless Blockchain Distribution Network”, 2018
[32] [Online] Ethereum. Ethereum 2.0 specs. Available: https://github.com
/ethereum/eth2.0-specs
[33] [Online] Vitalik. Sharding. Available: https://vitalik.ca/files
/Ithaca201807 Sharding.pdf
[34] [Online] Ethereum. Sharding. Available: https://github.com/
ethereum/wiki/ wiki/Sharding-FAQs
[35] [Online] Near Protocol. Codebase Available: https://github.com/
nearprotocol
[36] Zilliqa Team, ”The Zilliqa Technical Whitepaper”, 2017
[37] M. Zamani, M. Movahedi, M. Raykova, ”RapidChain: Scaling
Blockchain via Full Sharding”, 2018
[38] E. Kokoris-Kogias, P. Jovanovic, L. Gasser, N. Gailly, E. Syta, B. Ford,
”OmniLedger: A Secure, Scale-Out, Decentralized Ledger via Sharding”
[39] L. Luu, V. Narayanan, C. Zheng, K. Baweja, S. Gilbert, P. Saxena,”A
Secure Sharding Protocol For Open Blockchains”, 2016
[40] S. Li, M. Yu, S. Avestimehr, S. Kannan, P. Viswanath ”PolyShard:
Coded Sharding Achieves Linearly Scaling Efficiency and Security
Simultaneously”, 2018
[41] M. Al-Bassam, A. Sonnino, V. Buterin ”Fraud Proofs: Maximising Light
Client Security and Scaling Blockchains with Dishonest Majorities”,
2019
[42] E. Syta, P. Jovanovic, E. Kokoris-Kogias, N. Gailly, L. Gasser, I.
Khoffi, M. J. Fischer, and B. Ford. ”Scalable Bias-Resistant Distributed
Randomness.” In 38th IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy, May
2017.
[43] W, Wang, H. Dinh Thai, Z. Xiong, D. Niyato, P. Wang, P. Hu, Y.
Wen. ”A Survey on Consensus Mechanisms and Mining Management
in Blockchain Networks”, 2018
[44] M. Castro, B. Liskov, ”Practical Byzantine Fault Tolerance”, 1999
[45] Miller, A., Xia, Y., Croman, K., Shi, E., Song, D. ”The honeybadger of
BFT protocols.” In: Cryptology ePrint Archive 2016/199, 2016
[46] D. Schwartz, N. Youngs, A. Britto, ”The Ripple Protocol Consensus
Algorithm”, 2014
[47] D. Mazires, ”The Stellar Consensus Protocol: A Federated Model for
Internet-level Consensus”, 2016
[48] X. Li, P. Jiang, T. Chen, X. Luo, Q. Wen, ”A Survey on the Security
of Blockchain Systems”, 2018
[49] Y. Sompolinksy, A. Zohar, ”Secure High-Rate Transaction Processing
in Bitcoin”, 2013
[50] Y. Sompolinksy, Y. Lewenberg, A. Zohar, ”SPECTRE: Serialization
of Proof-of-work Events: Confirming Transactions via Recursive Elections”, 2016
[51] Y. Sompolinksy, A. Zohar, ”PHANTOM, GHOSTDAG: Two Scalable
BlockDAG protocols”, 2018
[52] Y. Sompolinksy, Y. Lewenberg, A. Zohar, ”Inclusive Block Chain
Protocols”, 2015
[53] Team Rocket, ”Snowflake to Avalanche: A Novel Metastable Consensus
Protocol Family for Cryptocurrencies”, 2018
[54] R. Pass, E. Shi, ”Thunderella: Blockchains with Optimistic Instant
Confirmation”, 2017
[55] P. Kocher, J. Horn, A. Fogh, D. Genkin, D. Gruss, W. Haas, M.
Hamburg, M. Lipp, S. Mangard, T. Prescher, M. Schwarz, Y. Yarom,
”Spectre Attacks: Exploiting Speculative Execution”, 2018
[56] R. Cheng, F. Zhang, J. Kos, W. He, N. Hynes, N. Johnson, A. Juels,
A. Miller, D. Song, ”Ekiden: A Platform for Confidentiality-Preserving,
Trustworthy, and Performant Smart Contract Execution”, 2018
[57] [Online] Intel, Sawtooth Lake (2017), Available:
https://intelledger.github.io/
[58] T-H. H. Chan, R. Pass, E. Shi, ”PaLa: A Simple Partially Synchronous
Blockchain”, 2018
[59] N. Ginnever, ”Set: Hub and Spoke Cryptographic Payment Channels”
[60] T. Close, A. Stewart, ”Force-Move Games”, 2018
[61] V. Petrov et al., ”Achieving End-to-End Reliability of Mission-Critical
Traffic in Softwarized 5G Networks,” in IEEE Journal on Selected Areas
in Communications, vol. 36, no. 3, pp. 485-501, March 2018.
[62] D. Ratasich, F. Khalid, F. Geibler, R. Grosu, ”A Roadmap Towards
Resilient Internet of Things for Cyber-Physical Systems”, 2018
[63] J. Choi, V. Va, N. Gonzalez-Prelcic, R. Daniels, C. R. Bhat and R. W.
Heath, ”Millimeter-Wave Vehicular Communication to Support Massive
Automotive Sensing,” in IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 54, no.
12, pp. 160-167, December 2016.
[64] [Online] Available: https://github.com/libp2p/ go-libp2p-quic-transport
[65] A. Langley 2017. ”The QUIC Transport Protocol: Design and InternetScale Deployment.” In Proceedings of the Conference of the ACM
Special Interest Group on Data Communication (SIGCOMM ’17).
[66] J. Benet ”IPFS - Content Addressed, Versioned, P2P File System”
[67] G. Xionghui, T. Kot, L. Xing ”Dora” Available:
https://dora.network/static/white paper 1 1 2 en.pdf
[68] ”Randao: Verifiable Random Number Generation,” Available:
https://randao.org/whitepaper/Randao v0.85 en.pdf
[69] [Online] Available: https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip0152.mediawiki
[70] J. Kwon, E. Buchman ”Cosmos”
[71] G. Wood ”Polkadot: Vision for a Heterogeneous Multi-Chain Framework”
[72] J. Coleman, L. Horne, L. Xuanji, ”Counterfactual: Generalized State
Channels”
