POLKADOT ECONOMIC SYSTEM SPECIFICATION
A PREPRINT
Michael Zargham
Founder, BlockScience
zargham@block.science
Krzysztof Paruch
Sr. Researcher, Vienna CryptoEconomics Institute
Krzysztof.Paruch@wu.ac.at
Gal Mordechai
Researcher, BlockScience
gal@block.science
Matthew Barlin
Lead Systems Engineer, BlockScience
barlin@block.science
Shermin Voshmgir
Director, Vienna CryptoEconomics Institute
shermin.voshmgir@wu.ac.at
August 19, 2019
ABSTRACT
To remain a viable platform beyond the life of its technical novelty and into the future, the Polkadot
network must be secure, flexible, and economically stable; it must generate value predictably and
sustainably for its many types of stakeholders. In addition to these key objectives, the ecosystem must
attract a sufficient number of participants through its vision and financial incentives to decentralize
itself as originally planned, while gaining wide-spread adoption. This paper is the result of a
deep architectural and economic analysis of the Polkadot ecosystem, starting from its protocol
specifications and arriving to a systemic abstraction focused on the network goals. The analysis
of this systemic abstraction is robust to changes in the designs of low level component algorithms
and protocols. Through this research we defined key objectives, health metrics, and KPIs for the
Polkadot economy, and mapped out Polkadot’s subsystems, stakeholders, and mechanisms in detail.
We formulated a multiscale state space representation of the economic system, including a differential
specification encoding the way in which the system evolves over time. These formalisms allowed for
a structural analysis of the relationships between low level parameters and the consequences changing
those parameters may have on the overall system goals. These representations are a prerequisite for
the development of computational models capable of testing economic subsystems and eventually
producing a system level digital twin to serve a support role in design and governance of the economic
system at large, through the informed use of the control levers designed by the Polkadot protocols.
At each stage of the design, development, and governance of such an economic system the goals of
our process are to improve our understanding of the system and to leverage that understanding to
mitigate risks. This paper contains the results of the first stage of our work focusing on constructing a
representative economic system which emerges around the deployed software and co-evolves with it.
The current work includes the interactions between its various subsystems and stakeholders, based on
these we generated a wide range of insights and recommendations, which will be presented in this
paper.
Keywords Economics · CryptoEconomics · Token Engineering · Token Economics · Systems Engineering
1 Introduction
As decentralized platforms achieve wider adoption and are implemented to create new types of business models and
efficiently solve existing problems, it is apparent that the current architecture of these platforms suffers from two main
issues: scalability and extensibility. Often this problem is due to a platform’s approach to canonicality and validity.
Polkadot, a blockchain with a heterogeneous multi-chain architecture, addresses these shortfalls by separating these
two concepts to create a scalable, secured network of decentralized platforms able to interoperate with existing public
(e.g. Bitcoin, Ethereum) and private (e.g. Hyperledger) chains. To achieve these goals, the Polkadot team designed a
A PREPRINT - AUGUST 19, 2019
new type of a hybrid consensus mechanism, nominated proof-of-stake (NPoS), in which DOT holders act in various
capacities using their DOT tokens to create new blocks (through the BABE mechanism) and achieve validation (finality)
on the aggregated relay chain state (through the GRANDPA consensus), [ 1]. To regulate this process, the team designed
multiple on-chain rewarding and slashing mechanisms that promote alignment and good behavior while punishing
misalignment and misconduct among the networks’ stakeholders. Through its network of connected chains, Polkadot
acts and can be described as any other known blockchain but with two additional attributes: 1) Pooled security - the
more chains and stakes invested in the system the higher its security becomes as it requires a malicious entity to
invest more resources in order to damage the system; and 2) Trust-free interchain transactability (interoperability) -
the heterogeneous multi-chain architecture of Polkadot, in which there are multiple parachains and bridges to existing
chains, that are all of connected to an aggregated relay chain, allows the various network’s stakeholders and mechanisms
to interact with each other in a trustworthy manner regardless of their native platform. To establish the efficient and
smooth operation of Polkadot, its design includes a treasury function which acts as the system’s "shock absorber" and
minimizes the volatility created by the multiple forces inflicted on Polkadot during its regular operation.
On top of its core mechanisms and value flows, Polkadot’s decentralized vision required the design of several peripheral
mechanisms to ensure its decentralized decision making process and ability to adapt from governance, economic,
design, and technical perspectives in a way that will maximally benefit its stakeholders. Moreover, an inclusion auction
mechanism was designed to enable parachains to bid on the right to be part of the network and benefit from its unique
value proposition.
The interdependence among its subsystems fits the Polkadot network into the definition of a complex system and makes
its states, behaviors, and end states often unintuitive and difficult to predict relative to the system’s objectives. To
address this complexity and mitigate the risks associated with launching and operating such a network, we designed a
model that represents the system’s multiple subsystems and mechanisms which will be able to predict the economy’s
behavior and outcomes under various assumptions and conditions. To increase the usability and accuracy of the insights
generated from this model, it may be evolved into a mathematical model and expressed in a programming language to
allow teams to run simulations and experiments on the network and test various data sets and assumptions impact on
the network and its members.
This is part of a broader infrastructure systems engineering practice that includes data driven refinements of the
computational models that serve to inform the body of decision makers steering the system. Such practice is necessary
even when the governing body is comprised of a centralized group of experts, and becomes increasingly critical as
decision making power is decentralized to stakeholders. Skin in the game presents an incentive to act in the systems’
best interest, but does not provide by default the necessary information to make a well informed decision about what is in
fact in the best interest of the system. Methods from systems engineering, industrial automation, and infrastructure scale
systems management are integrated with economics in order to facilitate informed input on the part of the governing
bodies and the analytics provided by this approach facilitate ’what-if’-style experiments in order to allow participants to
discover and support their positions through computational demonstrations.
2 Goals
The Polkadot economy can generate significant value to its stakeholders. However, to do so it must strive to achieve
four key goals: security, sustainability, value creation, and stability. These objectives will be the lens through which we
explore the network, its subsystems, and mechanisms throughout this document:
1. Security - Due to its NPoS Consensus mechanism, Polkadot’s security is defined by the total stake amount that is
captured within the network at any specific point in time. Moreover, due to the random assignments of stakeholders as a
security enhancement mechanism, this goal also refers to the network’s capability to fill all of its "regulator" roles (i.e.
validators, nominators, fishermen, collators) to ensure the network participants’ good behavior and ability to capture
any malicious activity.
2. Sustainability - Polkadot will be used as an infrastructure platform for many other applications and solutions.
Therefore, it must have the flexibility and adaptability to change and evolve over time. This can be achieved with
an efficient governance process that can navigate the network through changes without biases towards any specific
stakeholders’ group.
3. Value creation - The true value of Polkadot develops through the parachains that build on and connect to it. This
value can be measured by the parachain’s choice to develop on top of Polkadot rather than on different platforms and
the resources that flow through the network as a result of that. This value’s true measurement can be captured by the
external entry point into the system, the parachain slots auction mechanism. When parachains bid for a specific slot,
they are assigning a specific, real-world value to the network and "lock" it into it. Furthermore, by connecting to the
2
A PREPRINT - AUGUST 19, 2019
network, parachains bring new real-world value into the ecosystem. Therefore, from a network perspective, maximizing
the total value of parachain deposits and the total value that they bring into the platform are integral goals for the
network’s success.
4. Stability - Investors and developers continually evaluate a wide range of investment opportunities. In this process,
they measure their potential return on investment (ROI) for these various investments based on two factors: the return
that they can earn from the investment and the risk associated with that return. Risk, in the context of an infrastructure
platform like Polkadot, can be measured as the volatility and predictability of the network. Therefore, to ensure that
investors will be attracted to the network, the "noise" generated by the network must be minimal and its predictability
should be as consistent as possible.
These economy-level goals (in contrast with lower protocol level goals) can be achieved through the analyses of the
network architecture, the signals generated by the network’s subsystems, and their interactions among each other
even prior to the network’s launch. Once these analyses are completed, the insights generated can be encoded into
the network’s implementation and assist Polkadot to reach these highest level objectives with a much higher level of
certainty. In the following sections we will go through that process and explore how these goals could be best encoded
into the network.
3 Methods
The methodology underpinning this analysis is rooted in Economics and Systems Engineering and is detailed at length
in the forthcoming publication of the research roadmap of the Vienna Institute for Cryptoeconomics. To enable a good
understanding of this paper, first the general approach is described followed by all the core concepts applied in this
paper, outlined in the form of a descriptive glossary:
3.1 General Approach
A systemic analysis of Polkadot’s economy is enabled by building a multiscale model of the ecosystem and connecting
its layers to each other. Different scales provide both macro insights into how the economy interacts with the outside
world as well as micro insights into how single interactions of actors within the economy influence each other. A
multiscale model of an economy should have two layers at least, but with more granularity better observations can be
made. In the case of a complex system, where more interacting subsystems can be identified, the simplest multiscale
model will have a minimum of three layers, see figure 1(b). Such a representation manages to answer three key
questions:
• How does the ecosystem interact with the outside economy in which it is embedded?
• How do the subsystems of the ecosystem interact and influence each other, and how are their interfaces
defined?
• How do the mechanisms in each of the subsystems work and which actions lead to which state updates?
Representing an economy via a multiscale model alone is still not sufficient. These layers need to be connected to each
other in order to draw significant conclusions. This connection has to be established in two directions: For each pair of
neighbouring layers, both top-down and bottom-up linkages are required. As shown in figure 1(a), a proper system
model has to be embedded into the macro perspective to provide context on the one side, but on the other side it has to
be appropriately based on the micro specification to provide foundations. These connections ensure that for each layer
of the multiscale model:
• Sufficient context within the layer above (macro) is given
• Sufficient foundations in the layer below (micro) are secured
3
A PREPRINT - AUGUST 19, 2019
(a) Applying Lucas Critique in practice based on systems
engineering. (b) MultiScale Economic Systems Model.
Figure 1: Multiscale modeling is a critical element in large scale systems because critical decisions are implemented as
part of low level components, but effects are determined in part by processes and dependencies in the systems, and
ultimately the appropriateness of those decisions is determined at the high level goal or metric.
Figure 2: The focus of this research project highlighted as part of the broader economic systems engineering
methodology.
4
A PREPRINT - AUGUST 19, 2019
3.2 Core Concepts
• A complex system is a collection of (more than one) subsystems that are interconnected and affect each other.
The subsystems are interdependent: events in one subsystem influence events in one or more other subsystems.
For that reason, distinct subsystems cannot be analyzed on their own without carefully defining their interfaces,
as effects cannot be disentangled. Feedback loops between subsystems reinforce the dynamics described
above.
• A dynamic system is a system where time plays a role. Taking a snapshot of the system, which would only
represent the system at a point in time, only allows limited understanding of how subsystems and thus the
system as a whole will evolve. Many considerations need to explicitly consider the dynamics of the system to
enable operational security without unintended consequences in the long run.
• A multiscale model is a representation describing the same item in different scales. It presents the item from
very distant or very close allowing for zooming in or out on particular aspects. The most outer layer is the
macro perspective of the system, whereas the most granular picture can focus on various micro elements as
necessary. In between arbitrarily many layers can exist, depending on the concepts that need to be highlighted
and analyzed. A core rule is to make a (multiscale) model as simple as possible, but no simpler.
• An abstraction hierarchy is the order of succession of layers in a multiscale model. The outermost represen-
tation provides the most holistic perspective of the system and its boundaries to the environment, whereas
many specific microscale representations might be used to address particular concepts on a lower level. An
abstraction hierarchy consists of many micro-macro pairs similar to a staircase allowing for stepping up or
down in detail as required.
• The concept of microfoundations describes the required top down connection between two consecutive
elements of a micro-macro pair. It states that aggregate relationships on the macro level have to be consistent
with the principles that are valid on the micro level, and statements on the macro level have to be derived from
the fundamentals on the micro level. Only by using this approach reasonable conclusions on any macro level
can be made as the macro level is reasonably grounded in its corresponding micro level.
• The concept of macro-contextualization describes the required bottom-up connection between two consecu-
tive elements of a micro-macro pair. It states that the definition and design of principles on any level has to be
put in the context of targeted achievements on the corresponding higher abstraction level.
• The concept of different perspectives describes the added value to the analysis of a system by viewing
it from different angles. Some examples therefore are economic, technical, financial, and so on. Specific
characteristics of a systems only become visible when light is shed from different perspectives.
• A purpose-driven system is an environment that allows for interactions that are streamlined to serve a
common system goal. This goal can be described by one or more health metrics, KPIs, or a (weighted)
combination thereof. The system is designed with the intention to support the achievement of the system goals
by attracting specific types of behaviors that result in intended outcomes.
• A health metric or key performance indicator (KPI) is a measure of the state of the system focusing on
specific characteristics thereof and highlighting distinguished properties. Health metrics in dynamical systems
vary over time, and a healthy system is one that stays within, and exhibits attraction to a neighborhood in the
state space deemed (subjectively) healthy under these KPIs.
• An instrument is a well defined mechanism that might be used to influence or steer the system. This instrument
might be automated or discretionary and it might influence particular parameters or even whole structures of
specific parts of the system. The instrument might be thought of as a lever controlled by the governing entity
with the aim to push the system in the direction of the system goals.
• A trade-off is the marginal positive change of one variable in comparison to the marginal negative change in a
second variable. The properties of this connection ensure that both values cannot be increased at the same time
and that a compromise has to be found.
• A transmission mechanism is the way how changes triggered by instruments propagate and spread through
the system. Instruments do not affect KPIs directly, more often they activate a series of consecutive and
inter-dependant events that materialize in specific outcomes. A transmission mechanism might be compared to
a domino effect.
• A policy is a vector with a selection of parameters for all instruments out of the set of all feasible parameters
for each instrument. A policy will very likely imply a trade-off between contradicting goals and needs to be
balanced out.
• Dynamic control is the continuous adaptation of policies contingent on the system state, the health metrics,
and the system goals.
5
A PREPRINT - AUGUST 19, 2019
4 Mapping Polkadot from Multiple Perspectives
In this section the Polkadot economic system is examined from multiple perspectives in order to synthesize a holistic
view of the economy. The macro-economic perspective looks at how Polkadot’s internal economy relates to the open
economy. The most micro-economic perspective is the interrelations of the protocols themselves. However, to create a
complete picture it is necessary to take the meso-scale perspective both from the angle of the users, and from the angle
of the Polkadot economies subsystems while considering how DOTs flow between or are leveraged by or within those
subsystems.
4.1 Polkadot Economy relative to the Open Economy
The Polkadot ecosystem cannot be analyzed on its own, as it is embedded in the cryptoeconomy of all blockchain
projects, which again is a part of the global real economy. Therefore, all discussions about Polkadot have to be framed
in this global and open context as crucial interconnections to and influences from the outside will affect the observed
economy. Questions that might be addressed from this view are:
• How will the Polkadot economy evolve over time relative to the open economy?
• How will the value of the currency native to the Polkadot economy (DOTs) evolve over time represented by its
exchange rate on the secondary market?
• How will the outside demand for products and services provided by the Polkadot economy evolve over time
and what will drive this demand?
• How will outside demand shocks influence the Polkadot ecosystem and the activity within?
• Why should (necessarily foreign) working capital be allocated to serve the economy in the first place?
• How much working capital will be allocated to the economy to operate the ecosystem?
• Based on which metrics will foreign investors decide to interact with the Polkadot economy?
• What is the connection between significant indicators such as nominal and real interest rates, inflation rate,
and exchange rates.
A very important connection between any closed economy and the open outside economy is reflected in the exchange
rate of the economy’s currency. The exchange rate will serve as a valve reacting to events inside and outside of the
economy. A growing, reliable, stable and secure economy will also show strength in the price of the currency as long as
there exists external demand for the products and services created in the economy. When the economy is destabilized
from the inside by either inefficient markets or governance, the price of the currency will collapse.
Within the economy, inflation effects play a significant role. They will diminish the value of the currency in terms
of purchasing power and affordability of services in DOTs. Any DOT holder will perceive inflation as a system
participation tax, since his holdings will lose their value relative to the total value of the economy. Minting new token
and distributing them among selected participants will favor them and discriminate others. Careless increase of the
monetary base might put the stability of the economy at risk and cause the value of the token to collapse.
Both these effects are visualized in (figure 3). A more detailed analysis is enabled based on (figure 4), where the
questions listed above might be addressed. Here, the economy can be thought of as a machine that will produce
a product or a service as an output, given working capital is provided as an input. Investors will always base their
decisions whether to provide working capital or not on their expected return on capital per period. They will compare
these expectations to alternative uses of their capital, their personal discount rate, and risk appetite.
This logic describes the supply side of capital to the economy. In the Polkadot economy, this capital will be provided by
investors if their return after inflation and exchange rate effects will be higher than returns on other possible investments
in this period with the same risk profile. To make their investment decisions, investors will observe two key variables
before deciding whether to allocate working capital or not: Returns on Working Capital in FX and Market Price of the
service in FX. In some sense, this means that they will be highly interested in the ’growth rate’ and the ’price level
stability rate’ of the Polkadot economy. Both of these variables will influence their expectations about their potential
future profit.
The demand side of the economy is described by the Market Price in FX and captures the value of the service produced
by Polkadot to the outside world. If the service of interoperability between chains will be highly demanded and
functioning properly and reliably, this will have a positive effect on the market price. This will also reflect in higher
demand for the parachain slots in auctions, putting upwards pressure on the exchange rate of DOTs, given that the
inflation rate within the economy remains constant or at least stable and predictable.
6
A PREPRINT - AUGUST 19, 2019
Figure 3: Working capital required for running the economy is affected by inflation and exchange rates before returns
can be calculated.
Figure 4: Showing the service economy as an investment case: Working capital will be provided as long as expectations
about future returns outweigh the risks associated with the investment.
7
A PREPRINT - AUGUST 19, 2019
4.2 System Wide Protocol Map
Figure 5: The Polkadot Systemic map seven interconnected subsystems.
The Polkadot platform is constructed out of seven interconnected subsystems (Figure 5): Parachains, Relay chain,
Fishing process, Validator assignment, Treasury management, Governance, and Parachain slot auctions. The core value
flows in the network are generated when multiple parachains process their individual transactions, aggregate them
together into blocks, and suggest their validated block summaries to the relay chain validators (Parachain subsystem).
These block summaries are then aggregated through an NPoS hybrid consensus mechanism into the relay chain and
reach finality through GRANDPA (Polkadot’s finality gadget). To ensure the security and validity of this process,
validators are randomly assigned to participate in the relay chain block creation (BABE) and finality (GRANDPA) as
part of the NPoS process using Phragmen’s sequential method. NPoS consensus is integral for increasing the platform’s
security as part of the network pooled security concept and for promoting the network’s decentralization and distribution
of wealth among its multiple participants. To align the incentives of all platform members, a comprehensive list of
financial rewarding and slashing mechanisms were designed promoting good behavior and demoting misconducts by
stakeholders (Relay chain and Validator assignement subsystems).
To enhance the reliability and trustworthiness of the platform and regulate it even further, a Fishing process was also
created (Fishing subsystem). In this subsystem, entities are incentivized to be on the lookout for significant misconducts
(level 4 misconducts) and are financially rewarded to discover and flag these problematic events. In addition to this
mechanism, a lower level problem detection mechanism exists as well that is regulated by the network stakeholders and
occurs automatically and financially incentivize the reporting stakeholders for good behavior (level 1,2,3 misconducts).
To ensure the platform is inclusive to other projects and solutions and continue to grow and evolve, a parachain slot
auction mechanism was introduced in which parachains can bid for up to two years slots on 80 percent of the platform’s
8
A PREPRINT - AUGUST 19, 2019
parachain slots. Winning an auction means that the parachains will be eligible for connection to the relay chain and
the wider Polkadot ecosystem (the Parachain slot auction subsystem). If interested, alternatively parachains can pay
for inclusion of their blocks in the relay chain on a block-by-block basis (for the purposes of our analysis, since we
abstracted this subsystem high enough we can treat the various types of parachains consistently).
For the system’s smooth operations and to enable its adaptation and development over time, a Treasury subsystem was
created as well to collect funds from the network’s wide range of value flows and then distribute these to the relevant
stakeholders based on the platform’s rules and protocols (Treasury subsystem).
Finally, to define the rules, policies and protocols of the network and adjust them over time, a Governance subsystem,
which is comprised of voters and a governing body, was created with a clear definition of its responsibilities and
processes in which voting power is determined by the amount of DOTs held by the voter. Within the governing body,
there is a distinction between regular voters (DOT holders) and the Governance council that is elected periodically
(Governance subsystem) and has a veto power on votes.
An important note about the protocol level map: over the time of this project, several changes have been proposed or
implemented by the Polkadot team (e.g. parathreads). This layer is necessarily evolving ,and while the particular map
may become out of sync with the design, it is critical that the overall system structure is properly captured and used to
inform the higher level abstractions. The best measure of these maps is not necessarily precise replication of the current
protocol specification but rather the ability of the abstractions to remain useful despite changes. It is however a best
practice to maintain the protocol maps with period updates, but every proposed design change need not be reflected
immediately unless it causes a change that propagates across subsystem boundaries. Broadly speaking, a system of
systems engineering processes requires the freedom from subsystems to be iterated upon in an agile fashion without
constraining each other unnecessarily, but also being aware of the conditions under which a change can be expected to
impact another subsystem or the broader system’s structure.
9
A PREPRINT - AUGUST 19, 2019
4.3 User Taxonomy
Figure 6: The roles which actors can take within the Polkadot ecosystem and how their actions affect each other.
10
A PREPRINT - AUGUST 19, 2019
Within the Polkadot ecosystem, different actors can act within a predefined set of roles. Each of these roles has specific
action sets and serves for a specific purpose. A user of the system might choose to become an actor and fulfill one or
more roles at any given time. These roles may transition into each other contingent on the system circumstances and the
user’s choices and actions. It is necessary to characterize the relations in the roles as a precursor to defining a state space
model as one critical aspect of a state space model in defining how agents may have strategies that include participation
in multiple roles. Oftentimes, the outcomes that are most challenging to analyze are strategies that involve acting in
multiple roles concurrently (e.g, taking an action that cause a systemic shift in price and then utilizing knowledge of
that to extract financial returns on the secondary market).
In total, eight roles within the broader Polkadot ecosystems have been identified. These actors can be subdivided into
three categories, depending on the environment where they operate. This results in a classification into governance
roles (role: Council), relay chain roles (role: Account holder, DOT holder, Nominator, Validator) and parachain roles
(role: User, Collator, Fisherman, Validator). Notice, that the actor Validator can act in a role as a (passive) candidate or
an (active) validator on the relay chain or parachain respectively. Within the broader economy, it is also assumed that
any dot holder may participate in trading on a secondary market, which is part of the relation to the outside economy
discussed in an earlier section.
The visual (see figure 6) represents the interdependence of the actors, their action sets, and their allocation to the
environment of conduct.
Specifically focusing on the role-perspective in this diagram, insights into system-relevant interactions can be gained.
Interactions in the Polkadot economy and corresponding state-updates of the whole system (especially value and token
flows) will be partially triggered by deterministic or stochastic actions of these agents. Understanding how these
transmissions are connected and how they influence the state variables of the system is crucial for modeling system
mechanisms and their dynamics.
4.4 Multigraph State Space Model
Figure 7: The multigraph data model of the Polkadot economy.
11
A PREPRINT - AUGUST 19, 2019
The multiscale modeling paradigm used for the Polkadot economy requires that there is a model of agents by roles,
which is capable of tracking both agent level state information and maintaining pointers to functions encoding strategies
regarding those roles. An agent has a link to a role if that agent has a strategy regarding the mechanism related to
that role. More details about modeling approach can be found in the appendices. In the specific case of Polkadot, the
multigraph data model contains the following roles:
• Validator: any agent who has a non-empty strategy relating to the mechanisms which allow participation as a
validator will have a link to the validator role node in the multigraph data model and that link will include
metadata related to this role including, but not limited to, a pointer to the function defining their state dependent
strategy, their rate of inclusion in the validator set, their commission, and their reputation.
• Nominator: any agent who has a non-empty strategy relating to the mechanism allowing nomination of
validators will have a link to the nominator role node as well as a link to the node of any other agent they are
nominating; the sum of all nomination stake is enforced to equal the total nominal stake, and the decision to
nominate specific validators is a state dependent behavior function.
• Fisherman: any agent who has a non-empty strategy relating to the mechanisms associated with being a
fisherman will have a link to the fisherman role node. Staking for fisherman is optional but may affect rewards.
• Collator: any agent who has a non-empty strategy relating to the mechanisms associated with being a
fisherman will have a link to the collator role node. Filling the collator role may affect access to other roles or
reward profiles in other roles.
• Parachain Depositor: any agent who has a non-empty strategy relating to the mechanisms associated with
the auction mechanisms for parachain slots will have a link to the parachain depositor role node. Parachain
depositors may have have complex strategies related to the how much they are willing to deposit as well
as which timescales they are willing to participate in. Some agents may prefer to only engage in real-time
parathread auctions, whereas others may only participate in auctions for long term parachain slots. The nature
of the strategies may change as a result of changes to the parachain auction mechanisms.
• Governance Participant: any agent who has a non-empty strategy relating to the mechanisms associated
with governance will have a link to the governance role node. The governance role differs from other roles in
that the voting power in governance includes all tokens an agent holds irrespective of the other roles those
tokens are being used for. In addition to voting power, the governance link may include other metadata such as
engagement rates and whether or not the agent is currently a member of the council.
• Secondary Market trader: any agent who has a non-empty strategy relating to secondary market trading will
have a link to the secondary market role node. It is anticipated that all agents will have a link over this edge as
it necessary to buy DOTs to participate in the other roles, and any agent accruing DOTs can be expected to
occasionally realize profits through the sale of DOTs. While all agents are expected to have this role, there
will be a wide range of strategies regarding the use of this mechanism and it will be important to track how the
composition of strategies in understanding the health of the economy.
In addition to the role based links in the multigraph data model, there are additional links encoding agent to agent
information. The most notable of which is the sending of funds from one agent to another. This mixing process will
effect wealth distributions and thus must be modeled into the system. Initially, the mixing process is modeled with
data drawn from the early days of the Ethereum network, but will later be substituted with real data from the Polkadot
network.
Another important note about the multigraph data model is its ability to generalize from agent based models to
subpopulation based data models. As the network grows in size it becomes impractical to model every individual as a
unique agent but rather each agent node becomes a characterization of a group of agents that share a strategy profile.
The subpopulation modeling paradigm follows the same overall approach as an agent based model, but additional state
variables are required to track the number of agents in the subpopulation and other characteristics may be included to
ensure the subpopulation model is sufficiently rich to handle the system dynamics of the associated mechanisms.
12
A PREPRINT - AUGUST 19, 2019
5 Subsystem Specifications
Figure 8: The overall Polkadot economy specification.
Subsystem specifications are broken down in order to facilitate subsystem testing using well defined boundary conditions
that respect the interconnections between subsystems without needing to start the computational modeling with a
complete model of the entire economic system. Subsystems generally contain one or more core protocol and at least
one interconnection with another subsystem even when a full model of the connected subsystems is not included in the
analysis. Subsystem analysis can help identify how changes from one subsystem propagate into other subsystems using
controlled tests. Such tests inform systemic risk and allow potentially harmful cascade failure modes to be identified in
advance, and the risks of such failures to be mitigated.
13
A PREPRINT - AUGUST 19, 2019
5.1 Polkadot Regulatory Subsystem
Figure 9: Polkadot Economic Regulatory Subsystem.
The most critical and most complex subsystem in the Polkadot ecosystem is the Regulatory subsystem (Figure 9). This
subsystem contains the protocols for identifying and punishing misbehavior of validators in order ensure that no invalid
transactions are included in blocks on the relay chain. At the protocol level, these dynamics are well characterized by
the protocol specifications. At the economic system level, the critical properties of this subsystem are its relation to the
DOT distribution.
A central observation is that much of the DOT flow as a consequence of the regulator subsystems proper operations is
within the subsystem. For example, fisherman and validators get rewards for submitting fault reports and fault proofs
in addition to penalties being imposed upon the agents responsible for those faults in accordance with the protocol
specifications. At the economic systems level, an important observation is that when the fault rates are high then the
regulatory subsystem is experiencing taxation because the treasury captures a share of the penalties. When the fault rates
are low then the regulatory system is experiencing subsidies as minted rewards are being funneled into this subsystem.
14
A PREPRINT - AUGUST 19, 2019
One way to interpret the routing of minted rewards to the regulator subsystem is that the entire economy is paying
the regulator subsystem to provide a service. This process increases the share of the DOT economy that is owned by
agents fulfilling roles in the regulator subsystem even if not all of those DOTs are staked into the regulator subsystem.
If the agents operate with the strategy of staking their rewards then there will be an increasing share of the total DOT
economy which is bound up with the regulatory subsystem over time. Up to a point this is good because it is an increase
in security, however taken to an extreme it can result in low liquidity preventing participation in other roles, as well as a
feed forward concentration of wealth amongst the wealthy.
Initial parameter tuning should be done to attempt to ensure that there is a slowly increasing stake in the validator
subsystem, but this cannot occur too quickly lest it disrupt the rest of the economy. In the long term, when desirable
security condition are met, it may be advisable to attempt to balance the inflows and outflows of the regulator stake to
ensure the wealth concentration process doesn’t become the dominant property of the economy. Fiscal and Monetary
policy are the core concepts needed to further understand the levers related to this subsystem.
5.2 Monetary and Fiscal Policy
Figure 10: The instruments and dynamics of economic control of the Polkadot’s ecosystem.
As described in Appendix (C), instruments exist that might be used by the governing entity to intervene in the economy.
In the case of Polkadot figure (10) describes the dynamics observed in this subsystem.
The task of fiscal policy is entrusted to the treasury. It is responsible for the taxation of specific events in the ecosystem
and the redistribution of funds according to chosen goals. This is designed with the following ideas in mind:
• penalize behaviour harmful to the security, safety and proper functioning of the ecosystem.
• guarantee proper maintenance, servicing and upkeep of the ecosystem.
• ensure stable growth of the ecosystem.
All DOTs available to the treasury are partitioned into several baskets with dedicated spending purposes. The main
distinction is the grant allocation, renumeration allocation, rewards allocation and reimbursement allocation.
The grant allocation partition pool summarizes all types of ’government spending’ measures with the purpose of
maintenance and improvements of the systems. Allocation decisions are made in a consensus-driven fashion by the
governance entities and represent a collective goal of investment in the economy’s infrastructure. Grants provide
payments for coding or testing of new mechanisms as well as funding of new projects within the economy.
The renumeration partition pool summarizes all types of payments with the purpose of operating the economy. These
flows are defined by the variables configuring the operational mechanisms of the system. These payments can be
thought of as wages in a ’labor market’ of the economy.
15
A PREPRINT - AUGUST 19, 2019
The reward partition pool summarizes all types of payments that aim at increasing the economy’s security. These flows
are defined by the variables configuring the security and governance mechanisms of the system. These payments can be
thought of as wages for securing the ’labor market’ of the economy.
The reimbursement partition pool summarizes all types of payments aimed at increasing the fairness and liability within
the economy. These flows are dependent upon council decisions whenever errors in punishments need to be undone.
These payments can be thought of as compensation payments for unfair punishment and forgone profits
Monetary policy in the Polkadot ecosystem is limited to the automated and algorithmic increase of the monetary supply.
DOTs created by inflation are directly forwarded to the validators and nominators involved in block production. The
main idea behind this is:
• rewarding the participants of the regulatory sub-system
• ensuring that DOTs in float, thus not allocated to secure the economy will be subject to opportunity costs
caused by inflation
5.3 Treasury Subsystem
Figure 11: The Polkadot Economic Treasury Subsystem.
Although current design only has inflows from penalties of validators, it is possible for the minted rewards to be
allocated to the treasury. In the subsystem diagram (Figure 11), the monetary policy inputs and reward outputs are
colored to denote their absence from the current design. In general, it is possible for a design including direct flows into
the treasury from the minting process to exist. This is consistent with a general model that accounts for both Fiscal and
Monetary Policy. For the most part this subsystem is entirely under the control of the governance and is thus outlined
primarily to serve as an example of how it might allocate funds over time. An important aspect of this subsystem is
the fact that tokens are moving from a functionally illiquid state into a floating state. While technically tokens in the
treasury are liquid they are not circulating, so it is important to manage the rate at which tokens go into circulation
relative to the rate at which they enter the treasury as a result of the Fiscal Policy and the outcomes of the regulator
subsystem. It is recommended that the percentage of funds allocated to granting processes be managed through an
16
A PREPRINT - AUGUST 19, 2019
allocation policy and a buffering process that releases a fraction of the total funds available in each allocation to the
community according to a granting policy that on average balances the inflows with the outflows at both the treasury
level and the allocation level.
5.4 Governance Subsystem
Figure 12: Polkadot Economic Governance Subsystem
The governance subsystem is comparatively simple in the economic systems model. This is in part because the
governance system does not directly require tokens. Token holding affects the voting power of those participating in
governance, but those tokens may be used in other mechanisms as well. This is important because it means that those
actively participating have also the most say on decisions and not merely those with spare capital available to reserve
for exercising influence.
However, from an economic system modeling perspective this means the state space has some non-trivial relationships
between participating in governance and other roles. Still, the multigraph state space model handles these relations
elegantly and it suffices to view this subsystem more as representing engagement in the governance process than it is
important to model whether capital is locked up in the governance process. From a parameter testing perspective, it
should be sufficient to model and analyze the governance subsystem in isolation with some relatively basic assumptions
about the behavior of the rest of the economy. However, things will get quite complex when it is time to evaluate how
parameter change proposals passed by the governance might cause shocks to the broader economy. This second order
effect of the governance subsystem will be critical to model as part of a broader computer aided governance scheme to
ensure that governance participants are apprised of the potential impact of such proposals before choosing whether to
support those proposals.
17
A PREPRINT - AUGUST 19, 2019
6 Differential Specification
The differential specification is a characterization of how the economic system evolves over time. It contains the logic
required to characterize the system dynamics even when those dynamics are not under the control of the system designer.
In figure 13 one can see a general expression of a dynamic system factored out into a feedback loop. The differential
specification addresses all of these elements but specifically maps out the logical blocks required to match the economic
system specification.
Figure 13: A dynamical system containing decision making processes, state updates, and private information represents
the evolution of an economic system in terms of decision making and consequence of decision making even when the
outcomes were not those intended by the decision makers.
The multigraph state space model is not fully represented in the differential specification figure, but they are closely
related perspectives on the system. First of all, the full state of the system contains additional system level states which
are not directly reflected in the multigraph model, but the differential specification must enforce consistency between
the states in the multigraph data structure and system level states. For example, the total supply of DOTs is a system
level state and the sum of all DOTs in the multigraph model, plus those in the treasury, necessary equals the total supply.
While the state space data model defines an abstraction for the current status of the economy, the differential specification
encodes how that status evolves over time. In computational models, data may be used to estimate the current state of the
system using the state space model, but the differential specification is required to make projections about future states
or to characterize trends. In practice, state estimators are also improved by knowledge of the differential specification
through the use of tools, such as the Kalman filter. The detailed syntax for the differential specification diagram can be
found in the appendix.
18
A PREPRINT - AUGUST 19, 2019
Figure 14: The differential specification contains the logic for how the state of the economic system evolves over time
as a result of endogenous and exogenous processes, including both controlled and uncontrolled decisions and the
mechanisms which resolve the consequences of those decisions irrespective of whether the decision maker’s intended
outcome was achieved.
6.1 Component Specification
The component specification contains a simple description of each of the logical blocks in the differential specification.
Each block contains an abstraction of an element of the system which is sufficiently broken down to allow easy
implementation in a computational model while still allowing the system design to change without severely affecting
the model. The precise logic in each block will be derived from the most up to date protocol specifications, but is
not included explicitly to avoid bloating the document and to limit the risk of inconsistencies between specifications.
Economic system model code implemented regarding this specification will be factored by the relevant component.
6.2 Uncontrolled processes: Environment (yellow)
Uncontrolled processes representing activity that can be modeled with potentially state dependent stochastic processes
are reflected in yellow. These are driving processes which will be stochastic process generator models during the design
phase and fed with real data during the live system phase.
Environmental Process Driver 1 Transaction Volume
This external process is a model of the transaction volume data feed and outputs to three mechanisms. The Compute
Rewards and Compute Slash are dependent upon this driver and the Fault Rates driver. The transaction volume feed
directly affects the Transaction Fees mechanism.
Environmental Process Driver 2 Fault Rates
This external process is a model of assumed fault rates. Fault rates are classified according to level of violation (1, 2, 3,
or 4). Sets of rates can be modeled to simulate assumed frequency of violations. Performance data of a live network can
replace assumed models, with learned models providing a transition. The faults types are output to the Compute Slash
mechanism.
Environmental Process Driver 3 Correction Volume
This external process is a model of the correction volume data. This driver outputs to the Compute Reimbursments
mechanism.
Environmental Process Driver 4 Sends
19
A PREPRINT - AUGUST 19, 2019
This external process is modelled as a Markov mixing process representing fund transfer activity. This driver outputs to
the Transfer Funds mechanism.
Environmental Process Driver 5 Tips
This external process is modelled as a Markov mixing process representing the tip amount based on the size of the
transaction and market conditions. This driver outputs to the Transfer Funds mechanism.
Environmental Process Driver 6 Enabled Economy
This external process represents the intrinsic fiat value generated by the enabled economy in the secondary market. This
driver outputs to the Intrinsic Value Model mechanism.
Environmental Process Driver 7 Demand
This external process represents the activity on the secondary market exchange modelling buy and sell demand.
Transaction volume and prices are modelled through assumed functions, historical performance, machine learning,
and live exchange data when available. The output of this process updates the Price Change Model and the Volume
Change Model.
6.3 Uncontrolled processes: Behavior (pink)
Uncontrolled processes representing activity that can be modeled with state dependent functions, which are deterministic
responses to the state by uncontrolled actors and are represented as pink diamonds. Pink diamonds are often heuristics
determined by the behavioral economics literature. These heuristics may be bounded-rational best response given what
the actor knows or estimates about the system or naive strategies. In all cases, these models are treated as assumptions
since they cannot be known or enforced. In a live system it may be possible in some cases to estimate the composition
strategies or aggregate effect of the agents strategies through machine learning techniques. However, in design phase a
wide array of behavioral assumptions should be tested as means of ensuring the designs are robust to the uncertainty in
the agents behavior patterns.
User Behavior Function 1 Depositor Role
The user behavior/action representing Depositors. Agents choosing the role of Depositor are submitting bids in
parachain auctions. Evaluation of the state through logic will determine whether the agent submits a bid, as well as
output the lease period and amount of DOTs to bid.
User Behavior Function 2 Collator Role
The user behavior/action representing Collators. Collators can choose to participate in the economy based on an
opportunity from the Validator stake. The output of this decision is conveyed to the Regulator Staking mechanism
indicating their participation, but not as a direct flow that will be transferred to the agents’ Regulator Stake account.
User Behavior Function 3 Nominator Role
The user behavior/action representing Nominators. Agents may choose to use an amount of their DOT holdings to stake
as a proof of trust to other parties. Thus, the agent becomes a nominator of a validator. The output of this decision and
the amount of DOTs is conveyed to the Regulator Staking mechanism to account for the stakes of each agent and the
portion of that stake that is in the Nominator role.
User Behavior Function 4 Validator Role
The user behavior/action representing validators. The Validator chooses to stake their DOTs on themselves. The
Validator increases their probability of being chosen to validate blocks by convincing nominators to support them. The
output of this decision and amount of DOTs is conveyed to the Regulator Staking mechanism to account for the stakes
of each agent and the portion of that stake that is in the Nominator role.
User Behavior Function 5 Fisherman Role
The user behavior/action representing Fishermen. The Fishermen choose to stake their DOTs to support the claim of a
level 4 misconduct. The output of this decision and amount of DOTs is conveyed to the Regulator Staking mechanism
to account for the stakes of each agent and the portion of that stake that is in the Fisherman role.
20
A PREPRINT - AUGUST 19, 2019
User Behavior Function 6 Voter Role
The user behavior/action representing Voters. An agent may choose to participate as a Voter on proposals brought
forward by the Council or other members. The output of this determination goes to the Voter Participation mechanism.
User Behavior Function 7 Governance Decision
The user behavior/action representing Governance Decisions. The Governance Decision is an actor which is responsible
for the fiscal policy. Decisions from the Governance Role are sent as output to the Update Parameter mechanism.
6.4 Controlled Processes: Algorithmic Policy (green)
Controlled decision processes are the elements of the decision making layer which remain under the control of the
systems designers. The purpose of factoring these decision processes from the state update logic layer is that the
mechanisms in the state update layer are more structural, encoding concepts such as conservation of tokens or other
lower level constraints, whereas the decision making systems are necessarily going to evolve in order to steer the
system. One can imagine adjusting the algorithm for setting the inflation rate or the rules of the auction mechanisms for
parachain deposits much more readily than the underlying structure of the incentives for the regulatory subsystem. Even
the exact distribution of rewards and penalties is better viewed as algorithmic policy compared to the conditions under
which rewards are given and penalties are imposed. The latter is more structural. Though ultimately the distinction is
subjective, the goal in separating them in the abstraction is to facilitate governance using more mutable parameters, with
a focus on supporting the use of the available instruments to steer the economic system relative to the health metrics.
Control Function 1 Parachain Auction
Policy governing the control of parachain auctions. An algorithm developed to accept the addition of new parachains.
The output of this policy will determine accepted bids and trigger the mechanisms affecting the deposited bids,
specifically Bid Selection, Deposit Release, and Bid Submit mechanisms.
Control Function 2 Inflation Rate
Policy governing the control of inflation rates. This decision is informed by secondary market dynamics and driven by
the fiscal policy. Setting the inflation rate is output to the Mint mechanism.
Control Function 3 Grant Allocation
Policy governing the control of allocating grants. The decision is governed by the Treasury subsystem. The output of
this policy affects the Issue Grants mechanism.
Control Function 4 Accounting Partition
Policy governing the control of how DOTs held by the treasury are distributed into its accounts. The decision is governed
by the treasury subsystem to execute its fiscal policy. The output of this policy affects the Accounting mechanism.
Control Function 5 Proposal Consideration
Policy governing the process of how proposals are considered. This process will govern the Council actions and methods,
which will affect proposals brought to the Voter roles. The output of this policy affects the Voter Participation
mechanism.
6.5 Exogenous State Updates: Mechanisms (yellow ovals)
Environmental Process Model 1 Intrinsic Value Model
Exogenous state update mechanism representing the intrinsic value of DOTs. This mechanism is informed by the
Enabled Economy Fiat Value process and updates the Intrinsic Value Estimate state.
Environmental Process Model 2 Volume Change Model
Exogenous state update mechanism representing the transaction volume on the secondary markets. Input to this model
comes from the Demand process. The output of this mechanism updates the DOT holdings for each agent in its
Secondary Market graph.
21
A PREPRINT - AUGUST 19, 2019
Environmental Process Model 3 Price Change Model
Exogenous state update mechanism representing the transaction prices on the secondary markets. Input to this model
comes from the Demand process. The output of this model updates the Secondary Market Price.
6.6 System State Updates: Mechanisms
The mechanism or state update logic blocks represent the deterministic consequences of potentially non-deterministic
inputs. These logical blocks are direct consequences of the protocol specification applied over the state space data
model. Critically, many of these mechanisms will contain parameters which are themselves state variables. Ideally,
these mechanisms will not change unless the sub-protocols themselves are changed, which is expected to be less
frequent than changes to the decision making layer. In the event that there are changes to the mechanism, they will
be reflected exactly once in the model code even if they are called as a consequence of multiple decision making
processes. Furthermore, the abstraction level chosen is intended to preserve the differential specification structure
against significant changes in these mechanisms, as long as the overall structure of the system is preserved.
Mechanism 1 Bid Selection
State update mechanism representing bid selection. This mechanism is controlled by the Parachain Auction policy
and determines winning bids. This determination updates two states in the Depositors’ DOT graph by moving DOTs
from the Parachain Bids (subtracting DOTs) to Parachain Deposit (adding DOTs). If the bid is not selected, the
Parachain Bids is returned to the Floating Holdings state.
Mechanism 2 Deposit Release
State update mechanism representing deposit release at the expiration of the lease, which is governed by the Parachain
Auction policy. Deposit Release will subtract DOTs from the Parachain Deposit state and move (add) to the Floating
Holdings state in the Depositors’ DOT graph.
Mechanism 3 Bid Submit
State update mechanism representing bid submission, receives the bids from Depositors in DOTs and lease period, and
controlled by the Parachain Auction policy. Bid submission will update the State of Agents’ DOTs by adding DOTs
to the Parachain Bids state and subtracting DOTs from the Floating Holdings state.
Mechanism 4 Regulator Staking
State update mechanism accounting for regulator staking. This mechanism receives input when agents participate in
any of the regulator roles: Collator, Validator, Nominator, and Fisherman with a quantity of DOTs. The output of
this mechanism properly designates the stakes according to role for each agent in the Regulator Stake state.
Mechanism 5 Compute Rewards
State update mechanism for computing rewards. The Compute Rewards mechanism takes the Transaction Volume
and Fault Levels processes as inputs. Computed rewards are output to the Reward Allocation account in the treasury.
Rewards are disbursed to the Floating Holdings state in the agent multi-graph. If rewards are minted, then the Mint
Buffer for Rewards and Total Supply states are updated as well.
Mechanism 6 Transaction Fees
State update mechanism for charging transaction fees. The Transaction Fee mechanism takes the Transaction Volume
process as input. Computed transaction fees output to the Unallocated funds account in the treasury.
Mechanism 7 Compute Slash
State update mechanism for computing slash. The Compute Slash mechanism takes the Fault Levels process as
input. Computed slash DOTs are sent to the Unallocated funds account in the treasury and taken from the offending
Regulator Stake in the agent multi-graph.
Mechanism 8 Compute Reimbursements
22
A PREPRINT - AUGUST 19, 2019
State update mechanism for computing reimbursements. The Transaction Volume process is the input to this mecha-
nism. The output is accounted for by updating the Reimbursement Allocation.
Mechanism 9 Mint
State update mechanism representing the Mint function. The rate of minting is controlled by the Inflation Rate policy.
The minted DOTs through this mechanism add to the Mint Buffer for Rewards state.
Mechanism 10 Issue Grants
State update mechanism representing the issuance of grants. Governed by the Allocate Grants policy. This mechanism
disburses funds from the treasury’s Grant Allocation account.
Mechanism 11 Accounting
State update mechanism representing the distribution of funds into separate accounts held by the treasury. Governed by
the Accounting Partition policy, this mechanism manages the structure of treasury’s accounts.
Mechanism 12 Voter Participation
State update mechanism representing Voter Participation. This mechanism receives input from the Voter role decision
via an agent. The Voter Participation mechanism updates the Governance Participation state of the graph for each
agent.
Mechanism 13 Parameter Update
State update mechanism updating the set of economic control parameters. The input to this mechanism comes from
the Governance Decision role. The Parameter Update mechanism executes changes to the Economic Parameter Set
state.
Mechanism 14 Transfer Funds
State update mechanism representing transfers of funds. The inputs to this mechanism are the Sends and Tips
environmental processes. The Transfer Funds mechanism updates the Wealth Distribution state of the graph for each
agent.
6.7 State Variables
In the section on state variables the focus is on the system level state variables with some of the details regarding
the multigraph state space reduced for simplicity. The full state space includes the full multigraph data model as a
subset of the state even if though only summary descriptors are represented in the differential specification diagram.
Note that not all state variables are observable and some represent states that are modeled representations of private
signals, preferences, or other concepts related to the human parts of the system. The economic system is an abstraction
representing the whole system above and beyond the implemented software. Modeling and analysis of the human parts
of the system is necessary despite the lack of certainty or control over these elements. Fortunately, there is a strong
precedence in engineering for steering systems despite a lack of controllability or even observability for a large subset
of a system’s states.
State Variable 1 Parachain Deposits
State variable of parachain deposits structured within the multigraph of agents data model as a result of Depositor
Role activity. The Bid Selection mechanism adds DOTs in this edge when the bid is selected. The Deposit Release
mechanism subtracts DOTs in this edge when the lease term expires.
State Variable 2 Parachain Bids
State variable of parachain bids structured within the multigraph of agents data model when a bid is submitted by an
agent in the Depositor role. The Bid Submit mechanism adds DOTs in this edge when a bid is submitted. The Bid
Mechanism mechanism subtracts DOTs in this edge if the bid is chosen.
State Variable 3 Regulator Stake
23
A PREPRINT - AUGUST 19, 2019
State variable of regulator stakes structured within the multigraph of agents data model. The Account Regulator
Staking mechanism adds DOTs to this edge as a result of any of the regulator roles: Collator, Validator, Nominator,
and Fisherman. Regulator Stake state represents the amount eligible for calculation of rewards, and are added through
the Compute Rewards and Compute Reimbursement mechanisms, but also subject to subtraction through Compute
Slash mechanism.
State Variable 4 Floating Holdings
State variable of floating holdings structured within the multigraph of agents data model. The Bid Submit mechanism
subtracts DOTs in this edge when a bid is submitted. The Deposit Release mechanism adds DOTs in this edge when a
lease term expires.
State Variable 5 Governance Participation
State variable of governance participation structured within the multigraph of agents’ data model. The Voter Participa-
tion mechanism updates DOTs in this edge when an agent acts a Voter.
State Variable 6 Secondary Market
State variable of secondary market structured within the multigraph of agents data model. The Modeled Change
Volume exogenous mechanism updates DOTs in this edge when an agent trades on the secondary market.
State Variable 7 Wealth Distribution
State variable of wealth distribution structured within the multigraph of agents data model. The Transfer Funds
mechanism updates DOTs in this edge for each agent as a result of Tips and Sends activities.
State Variable 8 Mint Rewards Buffer
State variable containing the pool of DOTs for minted rewards. The Mint mechanism sends DOTs to this state. These
DOTs are held in this state until disbursed to regulators.
State Variable 9 Total Supply
State variable of the total supply of DOTs. While the compute rewards mechanism directly updates the state variable,
the state variable is also updated by the sum of holdings within the multigraph data model.
State Variable 10 Unallocated Funds
State variable of unallocated funds structured within the treasury accounting model. Several mechanisms execute
deposits and withdrawals from this account, specifically, the Issue Grants, Compute Slash, and Transaction Fees
mechanisms.
State Variable 11 Grant Allocation
State variable of grant allocation structured within the treasury accounting model. The Issue Grants mechanism
disburses grants and thus updates by subtracting corresponding DOTs from this account.
State Variable 12 Reward Allocation
State variable of reward allocation structured within the treasury accounting model. The Compute Rewards mechanism
disburses rewards and thus updates by subtracting corresponding DOTs from this account.
State Variable 13 Reimbursement Allocation
State variable of reimbursement allocation structured within the treasury accounting model. The Compute Reim-
bursements mechanism disburses reimbursements and thus updates by subtracting corresponding DOTs from this
account.
State Variable 14 Economic Parameter Set
24
A PREPRINT - AUGUST 19, 2019
State variable of the array of economic parameters. The set of parameters are determined to achieve a fiscal policy goal.
The governance subsystem executes updates to this state through the Parameter Update mechanism.
State Variable 15 Intrinsic Value Estimate
State variable of the intrinsic value estimate. This state is updated through the Intrinsic Value Model exogenous
mechanism.
State Variable 16 Secondary Market Price
State variable of the secondary market price. This value is updated by the Price Change Model exogenous process.
6.8 Metrics: Goals and Measures of System Health
The goals of the system are expressed in natural language as part of the system overview, but in practice they need
to be captured as computable functions of the system state. There is not necessarily a one-to-one mapping between
goals and metrics, so there are many more than four metrics expressed in the differential specification. More generally,
the metrics category contains any facts computed from the system states that would be necessary either for computing
the decisions in the decision layer at the next time step, or for judging the health of the system relative to the system
goals. Both analysis of computational experiments and of real data could lead to changes in the metrics of interest. The
metrics layer is the most easily adjusted layer of the differential specification because it contains only calculations of
additional facts based on the current system state.
Performance Indicator 1 Distribution Error
Metric indicating the deviation in the distribution of Parachain Deposit across agents versus a determined desired
distribution of selected parachain auctions. The determined distribution may be based on simulated results, representing
auction bid amounts, time commitments, and actor roles, using the Tokens Not in Regulator Stake or Parachain
Deposits state.
Performance Indicator 2 Regulator Working Capital Return
Metric indicating the return on working capital for regulators. Choosing to participate in the regulator economy should
offer a return on that investment across the regulator roles. The net return in DOTs can be further quantified as a fiat
value using the secondary market price at time of commitment and at reward disbursement are used. Computation
depends on the Regulator Stake and the Floating Holdings in the agent graph, as well as the Secondary Market
Price state.
Performance Indicator 3 Tokens Not in Regulator Stake or Parachain Deposits
Metric indicating the quantity of DOTs not in regulator stakes or parachain deposits. This is an indicator for economic
activity of DOTs in the regulatory subsystem and parachain auction interface, computed from the agent multi-graph.
Performance Indicator 4 Token Velocity
Metric indicating the token velocity of DOTs, calculated as the quantity of DOT transfers over a specified unit of time.
The sum of DOT movement per timestep is the most granular velocity available. This is essentially the number of times
a token changes ownership. Under the equation of exchange theory and its crypto-derived versions, token velocity is a
fundamental economic indicator.
Performance Indicator 5 Wealth Distribution
This metric is computed from the Wealth Distribution state in the agent graph. The Gini coefficient is a singular value
that quantifies the area between a Lorenz Curve and the equality line (a perfect diagonal). The Gini coefficient is an
indicator that describes the degree of inequality across a distribution of wealth over the various stakeholders.
Performance Indicator 6 Adjusted Working Capital Return
Metric indicating the inflation adjusted return on working capital, using the Realized Inflation metric. The return on
investment for participating in the regulator economy is diminished by the inflation of DOT (computed in the Realized
Inflation metric) experienced during the period between commit and disbursal. Adjusted Working Capital Return must
be computed after those two metrics.
25
A PREPRINT - AUGUST 19, 2019
Performance Indicator 7 Realized Inflation
Metric indicating the realized inflation of DOTs. As the state Total Supply of DOTs increases due to minting, the
inflation rate is computed. This is a leading indicator for other metrics and must be computed prior to them, specifically
Interest Rate Gap and Adjusted Working Capital Return.
Performance Indicator 8 Tax:Subsidy Ratio
Metric indicating the ratio of taxes paid to subsidies. This is computed from the set of Treasury Accounting states.
Performance Indicator 9 Interest Rate Gap
The interest rate gap measures the difference between the Realized Inflation and the Target Inflation Rate metrics.
This metric expresses the effectiveness of the governance subsystem, in terms of its control. The time from an economic
parameter update and the interest rate gap will indicate the responsiveness of the subsystem.
Performance Indicator 10 Enabled Economy Value
Metric indicating the fiat value of parachain deposits using the enabled economy value derived from secondary market
dynamics. The value is computed from the Parachain Deposit state in the agent multi-graph and the Secondary
Market Price state.
Performance Indicator 11 Target Inflation Rate
Metric indicating the target inflation rate computed from the Economic Parameter Set state. The decision to update
the economic parameter set will have an expressed or implied (as a result of other parameters) target inflation rate.
Performance Indicator 12 Price Gap
Metric indicating difference between the Intrinsic Fiat Value of DOT and the performance of DOTs on the secondary
market, the Secondary Market Price state.
Performance Indicator 13 Market Price Volatility
Metric indicating the volatility of the price of DOT on the secondary market. Statistical measures can be computed
from the Secondary Market Price state, including its time-based central moments and frequency-based power spectral
density.
7 Insights and Recommendations
By analysing the Polkadot network from various perspectives, we made a number of insights that will assist the Web3
team in constructing a secure, sustainable, value generating, and stable network. These insights were generated from
the work we have done so far and prior to developing a digital twin–a computational model–for the system, that will
assist in further evaluating the network and run experiments to scientifically test the network under different conditions
and assumptions.
As a general recommendation, based on our interactions with the Web3 team and the analysis we have done on the
Polkadot network, we would advise adding an economics researcher into the core project team. We believe that adding
this skillset to the team will help ensure that a robust Polkadot economy incorporating the best practices will be built on
top of the novel technical infrastructure.
7.1 Security
In this section we discuss insights related to forces that impact the total stake amount captured within the network’s
regulatory body.
From analyzing the constituent subsystems in the network, we understand that the regulatory subsystem members are
subsidized by network inflation and are incentivized for good behavior and penalized for bad behavior. In practice,
regulators charge the network for their services and pay back taxes through slashable faults. As a result, over time these
subsystem members benefit from a wealth gaining economic force for good valid transactions and a wealth reducing
26
A PREPRINT - AUGUST 19, 2019
economic force proportionally to their faults. These dynamics make the network a healthy economic system insofar as
their incentives are aligned with the health of the network.
Due to the entanglement of the various stakeholders behaviors and their parameters in one another, to efficiently model
the network’s behavior, the regulatory sub-system should be managed as a "policy space" rather than as individual
stakeholders. This means that the computational model will include higher-level parameters that will be related to the
subsystem as a group and its impact will be measured collectively on the network.
7.2 Sustainability
For insights related to sustainability we focus on Polkadot’s governance and its ability to adapt to change and evolve
through time.
The governing body has several levers of control it can use to steer the network towards its objectives. These levers take
the form of policies, parameter changes, and budget allocation. To ensure that the governing body is driving the network
towards the desired overall goals and ensure that the decision makers are well informed about their decisions, clear
visibility, and a sense of how governance choices impact the network are critical. The complexity of these intensifies
due to the network’s architecture: choices that relate to one subsystem may have cascading effects on multiple other
subsystems. Therefore, monitoring the network’s parameters through the lens of specific KPIs and network’s health
metrics on an ongoing basis will be beneficial to the network and contribute to steering it successfully towards long
term growth. Furthermore, establishing a model that represents all the subsystems in the network and the relationships
among them will assist decision makers in running experiments and "what-if" scenarios that will result in making better
decisions.
Due to the complexity of the network and its various subsystems, the governing body must be the source of novel
interpretation of the system’s behavior to steer it towards its objectives. However, due to the decentralized nature of
the platform algorithms and their parameters will be the ones to make most of the decisions in reality. Therefore,
the governing body must be well informed on the system’s state and the impact of their decisions on the network.
Specifically, governance decisions should be made based on processes that incorporate inputs from multiple parties
and include human interpretations as much as possible based on these experts’ systemic understanding. The reason
that discretionary involvement is so important for platform automation, which will be the result of these decisions
(through the algorithmic policies), is that complex systems are frequently subject to unintended consequences due to the
feedback wired into them. To enhance the adaptability of the network’s governing body even further, we recommend the
governing body use a combination of discretionary long term and short term policies and delegate lower level decisions
to specialized sub-groups on specific fields, similar to the Polkadot’s technical committee’s involvement in technical
oriented decisions.
Through our analysis, we believe that establishing an economic advisory team to address the system’s complexity on
this topic is key for the success of the network. For implementation purposes, this team can either be responsible for
making a limited number of decisions or have only a limited amount of decision power in choices that are related to
their field of expertise. Alternatively, the team’s responsibility could be to write reports prior to votes related to their
field of expertise that will then be shared with voters and governance council members. Due to the current development
stage of Polkadot and its maturity, the latter design is preferable in our opinion as it will minimize any code changes
while maximizing the overall adaptability of the network.
7.3 Value Creation
A proxy for the value captured in the platform is the parachain slot auction mechanism. Therefore, in order to show
how the network’s value might be impacted over time we will focus on insights related to that subsystem.
Polkadot cannot assert anything in real world value (fiat), as all current values in the system are denominated in DOTs.
Therefore, the system is currently exposed to a value risk due to its current structure in which the only connection
between DOTs and real value is through the parachains’ slot auction mechanism. As a result, the value derived from
parachains will cascade into the value of the platform and create its intrinsic real value. Until that value is discovered
over time, the value of DOTs will only be defined by other DOTs and investor speculation.
Parachain activity is effectively buffered from the financial system as the regulatory subsystem successfully delimits it
from the relay chain from a correctness standpoint without requiring any explicit financial flows. Moreover, the financial
flows are isolated to the parachain deposits locking mechanism, which forcibly align the incentives of parachains to the
DOT value due to its stakeholders’ "skin in the game." This means that for a network attack, which can be achieved
through undermining the health of the network’s regulatory subsystems, the attacker will be required to undermine the
27
A PREPRINT - AUGUST 19, 2019
health of the DOT economy and thus cause its own DOTs to lose value. These dynamics perfectly align the incentives
of the parachains and the network and make the network healthier.
7.4 Stability
Economic stability is key for Polkadot to increase its appeal and adoption, therefore in this section we will focus on
insights related to minimizing network volatility and increasing its predictability.
Generally, Economies are open systems by definition and interact with the external environment regularly (as described
in section 4.1). Polkadot in this regard is no different and is connected to the world and other cryptocurrency projects.
As a result, it will definitely be impacted by other systems and forces and vice versa. To smooth this impact, navigation
and control of the network through policies cannot be limited to policies with internal effects only and must include
mechanisms that will soften the external forces and their impact on the economy.
Polkadot’s power over parachain deposits and governance decisions periodicity is key for proper systemic governance
and control, as from a systemic view a lot of systemic properties are characterized by their frequency domain and their
power to magnify or suppress the system’s signals rather than the magnitude of these individual events. Therefore,
through these 2 sub-systems, Polkadot can control the periodicity of "shocking" the system as levers to steer it towards
specific directions even without controlling the intensity of each specific event’s magnitude.
In managing the network’s treasury subsystem, a treasury buffer partition should be introduced to serve as a "shock
absorber" for volatility in the network. In the early days of the system, the levels of "volatility in behaviors" will be
significant, leading to rapid swings in value. To soften these movements, our recommendation is that the treasury buffer
be large at the beginning to support the network to reach a a steadier state. Over time, real system data will expose
the reasons for this volatility and these issues could be addressed. Once actions will be taken and tested to solve these
issues, the treasury buffer could be significantly reduced as long as it remains large enough to absorb and cover any
plausible shocks. The risk in cases that the buffer will not be sufficient to cover system shocks is that inflation will
be forced and compound through the economy. These scenarios should be diligently avoided due to their significant
impact on the economy and its stakeholders. Hence, our recommendation is that the buffer should be defined by the
governing body as a percent of the treasury funds and that this parameter should adapt over time based on the maturity
of the network.
As part of the governance control on economy’s funds and as part of the economy’s attempt to create predictability
for the network and its spending, treasury funds should be allocated for specific objectives (i.e. grants, subsidies).
Doing so will enable the governing body to better manage its control levers without overwhelming itself with data and
decisions. Furthermore, by doing so and changing these allocations on a periodic manner, the governing body creates
less "economic shocks" to the system and establishes a more predictable economy. A risk of using this control lever is
the fact that the flow of funds is only unidirectional from the treasury to the other network’s subsystems and therefore
the impact of these actions must be closely metered to ensure that programmatic actions that are triggered under certain
circumstances are not creating economic shocks to the system.
In the current design, funds go directly from minting to rewards which creates a 100 percent flow-through rate and a lot
of signal noise in the network.
To mitigate this economic shock, a buffering process which mints new tokens at a fixed inflation rate over time into a
treasury partition and from there to rewards subsidies is important for creating a filtering mechanism that will reduce
the funds pace and the flow-through rate of funds in the network. This mechanism ensures that all required funds will
be minted and eventually injected into the system at a consistent pace. It will also ensure that although the rewards may
vary over time, the network’s inflation will remain constant. This approach also enables the governing body to focus
only on longer term inflation decisions.
The network’s inflation rate is an economic force that acts on the economy while the rest of the network’s created
"value" and economic growth acts as a counter balancing force. Therefore, it is key to refine the assessment of the
network’s true value, so the inflation rate can always be kept below the economic growth force and thus eventually the
network as a whole will experience aggregate growth. This will be impossible to predict directly in advance, however it
can be managed over time through the governing body by setting inflation rates appropriately and using proper tools
and transparency in the various network’s parameters and KPIs.
To better understand the network stability and how funds are flowing through the system, Polkadot should define a
health metric that is comprised of a target distribution among funds in the treasury, staked funds in the regulatory
subsystem, backing funds for votes in the governance subsystem, deposited funds in the parachain auction mechanism
subsystem and floating DOTs in the network. As these subsystems are isolated, maintaining a constant ratio among
28
A PREPRINT - AUGUST 19, 2019
these over time will keep the network stable and act as a landmark toward which the economy should be steered in
order to achieve growth and maintain the dynamics among its various stakeholders.
8 Next Steps
The economic system presented provides the structure for implementing a computation model, and the specification is
aligned with the cadCAD modeling framework and computational science software developed by BlockScience. The
detail presented is sufficient to allow direct characterization of the appropriate mathematics for each component in the
differential specification in accordance with the protocol and subprotocol specifications even as they evolve as part of
Polkadot’s ongoing design and implementation processes.
The next steps are to implement this economic system model as a computational model, define clear test cases relating
the parameters under the control of the web3 foundation to the measures of economic health characterizing the economic
health of the post-launch Polkadot economy.
Where possible data from other networks (including the live test net implementation of substrate as appropriate) will be
used to define assumptions in computational experiments. Additional models of user behavior will be drawn from the
behavioral economics literature. Since behavior cannot be known a priori, behavioral model choices are considered part
of the test cases, and where applicable can be A/B tested using the cadCAD feature set.
With an implemented computational economic model and a set of well defined experiments respecting the economic
specifications, the web3 team can make scientifically informed decisions about their parameter choices for the livenet
launch of the network.
Broadly speaking this document should be considered a snapshot of a living document which can evolve with input from
key Polkadot system stakeholders. By design, efforts to refine these specification should be far less labor than producing
an initial holistic perspective for the Polkadot economy. The emerging practice of economic systems engineering, which
merges the domain expertise of an economist and the methods of a systems engineer, should be drawn on in the ongoing
maintenance of these specifications.
9 Further Reading
This paper leverages a very wide range of domain specific knowledge ranging from economics to large scale infrastruc-
ture automation. In an effort to make it as accessible as possible key terminology and syntax for our diagrams has been
organized into appendices. In addition to these appendices the following materials may be useful to the reader.
• On the modeling systems for applications:[2], [3], [4], [5], [6], [7], [8] [9], [10], [11], [12]
• On systems of systems Engineering: [13], [14], [15], [16], [17], [18]
• On optimization, dynamics and distributed control: [19], [20], [21], [22], [23], [24]
• On dynamic games: [25], [26], [27], [28], [29], [30]
• On coordination and cooperation: [31], [32], [33], [34], [35],[36] [37], [38]
• On (in)stability of financial networks: [39], [40], [41], [42]
• On multi-scale models:[43], [44], [45], [46], [47]
• On the relation between Micro and Macro Economic system Models: [48],[49], [50], [51], [52]
• On Incentives, uncertainty and behavioral economics: [53], [54], [55], [56], [53], [57]
• On hybrid systems and uncertainty in decision algorithms: [18], [58], [17], [59]
• On learning in games and networks: [60], [61], [62], [63], [64], [65]
• On cybernetics and governance: [66], [67], [68], [69],
• On fairness, social choice and ethics: [70], [71], [72], [73], [74]
• Automated Infrastructure, economics and Industrial IoT: [75], [76], [77], [78], [79], [80]
29
A PREPRINT - AUGUST 19, 2019
A Appendix: Extended Definitions of Systems Concepts
System: A system is a group of interacting or interrelated entities that form a unified whole. A system is delineated
by its spatial and temporal boundaries, surrounded and influenced by its environment, described by its structure and
purpose, and expressed through its functioning. Systems are the subjects of study of systems theory.
Complex System: A complex system is a system where the behavior of the whole within a given environment cannot
be understood directly by understanding the behavior of the parts and the environment as separate additive entities.
Rather the system level behavior is deeply dependant on the relations between the parts. Complex systems are systems
whose behavior is intrinsically difficult to model due to the dependencies, competitions, relationships, or other types
of interactions between their parts or between a given system and its environment. Systems that are "complex" have
distinct properties that arise from these relationships, such as non-linearity, emergence, spontaneous order, adaptation,
and feedback loops, among others. In practice, complex systems exhibit unintuitive behaviors when acted upon. In
many cases it is useful to represent such a system as a model (for example a network where the nodes represent the
components and the links their interactions). Because such systems appear in a wide variety of fields, the commonalities
among them have become the topic of their own independent area of research.
Model: A model is a graphical, mathematical (symbolic), physical, verbal representation, or simplified version of a
concept, phenomenon, relationship, structure, system, or an aspect of the real world. The objectives of a model include
(1) to facilitate understanding by eliminating unnecessary components, (2) to aid in decision making by simulating
’what if’ scenarios, (3) to explain, control, and predict events on the basis of past observations. Since most objects and
phenomenon are very complicated (have numerous parts) and are much too complex (parts have dense interconnections)
to be understood in their entirety, a model contains only those features that are of primary importance to the model
maker’s purpose.
Formal model: A formal model is a model in which the description is complete and non-ambiguous. It has well-formed
syntax and semantics, such that it is amenable to systematic (usually automatable) processing and analysis subject to
logical rules. It is based on rigorous methods and formats; it often enables analysis to be performed on the models.
Mathematical model: A mathematical model is a special type of formal model, and a description of a system using
mathematical concepts and language.
Computational model: A computational model is a special type of a mathematical model which is expressed in a
programming language. It allows one to run simulations, or backtest against data.
A Digital Twin: A computational model integrated with data from an implemented system that aids the operations
and governance of that implemented system. Digital twins support both automated operations and human governing
mechanisms, increasing visibility into the systemic effects of using specific instruments to change the system’s behavior.
(a) Automated (b) Autonomous
Figure 15: Automated versus Autonomous systems.
Automated System: A closed feedback loop between a computational system and another system being controlled that
dynamically enforces a set of rules with the intent to drive a particular system behavior. The goals and behavior of
agents are extrinsic to the automated system. Decentralized network software provide an automated system.
Autonomous System: A closed feedback loop at a sufficiently high level of abstraction as to require no additional
inputs in order to act. The goals and behaviors of an autonomous system are intrinsic.
30
A PREPRINT - AUGUST 19, 2019
Economic System: An autonomous system including but not limited to assets, mechanisms, agents, instruments, and
policy makers. An economy may include automated software as part of its infrastructure, but the economic system is
characterized by the interplay between the human and machine elements.
Commentary Regarding Models:
• Computational models are used extensively to explore complex systems because complex systems exhibit both
non-ergodicity and non-linearity. Both non-ergodicity and non-linearity limit our capacity to extrapolate our
past observations about a system’s past behavior into predictions about future behavior. Understanding the
boundaries of our models is paramount to using them properly.
• Models are subjective framing and modeling choices that directly effect the conclusions one reaches when
using them. This is true of all fields and places an onus on the systems engineer to make choices which
improve the usefulness of the models, even at the cost of precision. Models should be as simple as possible but
no simpler.
• While there is no optimal model per se, it is not fair to say all models are equal. In practice, models are
judged by usefulness where usefulness is measured relative to some desired end. A model is useful when its
application in the manner described above facilitates the operation and governance of the economic system in
accordance with its goals.
31
A PREPRINT - AUGUST 19, 2019
B Appendix: On Controls and Policies in Economies
Figure 16: Government impact markets with the aim of guidance towards its set objectives.
An economy is a rule-based trade environment in which humans organize their interactions to pursue common goals.
These goals are typically set by the society in a democratic process, and compliance with the targets is monitored by the
directly elected governance entity. How well the economy performs with respect to its goals is tracked by economic
indicators and health metrics as described above. In order to steer the society towards its goals, if the metrics suggest
otherwise, policy instruments exist which may be used to intervene in the markets. These instruments are used to
enable corrections caused by market inefficiencies, as well as internal and external shocks to the economy. (Figure 17)
demonstrates the process of governance intervention on markets with the aim of guidance towards the set objectives.
In the most abstract sense, the economy desires to achieve the state of stability and growth. However, trade-offs between
these goals exist, since both cannot be reached at the same time to a full extent because measures necessary to get there
partially contradict each other. To ensure the appropriate balance between both forces, in most evolved economies the
mechanisms driving growth and stability are subject to supervision of two distinct entities: the monetary authority and
the fiscal authority. They engage in a coordination game and base their decisions on their counterpart’s actions as well
as the conditions of the economy.
The monetary authority, most often a central bank or the currency board, sets a monetary policy by choosing parameters
for controlling money supply and the short-term interest rate within the economy. Their main goal is to ensure price
stability relative to factors both inside and outside of the economy, observing the changes in prices of consumption
goods and the foreign exchange rate.
32
A PREPRINT - AUGUST 19, 2019
The fiscal authority, most often a representative-based government, sets a fiscal policy to ensure stimulation of growth
and redistribution of wealth in accordance with the economic goals. To do so, it sets taxes and provides social transfers
within the economy and decides the amount of government spending. A fiscally responsible government will make sure
not to go into debt and thus place a burden on future generations.
These interventions, but also simple market inefficiencies and shocks, make the economy react in business cycles of
alternating phases of growth and recession.
33
A PREPRINT - AUGUST 19, 2019
C Appendix: Economic System Specification Syntax
Setting the boundaries of a system defines which of the component processes are considered internal and which are
external. External processes may affect a defined system but should not directly interact with the internal system
processes. The systems view specifies a set of intellectual tools that can be applied to any sized set of processes,
resources, and information. The systems approach simplifies problems, describes for significant processes, and identifies
controls. The system view is used to create simulations of future conditions. Another of the benefits of this approach is
that it clearly identifies the assumptions on which simulations are based. A systems model is both a valuable research
tool and a platform for communication and decision-making. Thus, a carefully constructed system model is necessary
for capturing the structural dynamics of an economic system.
Colors in the Economic System Specification refer to:
Flow of DOTs
Interface between Subsystems
Economic Subsystem
External Process
Uncontrolled Behavior
Controlled or Automated Behavior
State Information
Symbols in the Economic System Specification refer to:
Mechanism Action: A method exposed to a set of actors, which can include agents,
expected populations, and controlling entities. The mechanism receives user actions and
input, employing state information and control policy parameters to provide an update to
a defined set of state variables.
Mechanism Control: The action space available exclusively to the controlling entity.
May be actively controlled through a strategy developed using information gathered from
available publicly and privately known state variables, metrics, external factors, internal
beliefs, and utility functions. The control mechanism may change controllable parameters
and/or invoke a phase change of the system via the control.
34
A PREPRINT - AUGUST 19, 2019
State Variable: Defined to capture the shape and property of the network, representing
publicly or privately held output of the system. Mechanisms provide updates to the state
variable. The set of all state variables defines the state of the system.
Conserved Flow: A flow represents the mass of currency movement. The currency must
be the same as the stock at either end. The link identifies the relationship between nodes.
The flow is conserved through accounting for all sources and sinks of the currency.
Information Flow: Any data structure used to convey a decision to a mechanism action
or a control mechanism. The information may be the result of a change from external
processes, a state update, or a control policy change.
Decision/Process: Logic that informs action on an action mechanism, control mechanism,
or other decision. The condition accepts inputs from a subset of state variables, metrics,
external factors, internal beliefs, policy goals, and utility functions.
External Perspective: Information from the outside world that affects user action control
policy decisions on the internal system. This feed may be based purely on external factors
or may represent the external view of the performance of the internal system.
Detailed Relation: External dynamic not part of the internal system. However, it may
contain a level of complexity and exert critical influence on the internal system to require
further development.
35
A PREPRINT - AUGUST 19, 2019
D Appendix: Agent-Role Data Models
For economic systems comprised of multiple mechanisms, agents will have more advanced strategies including
the ability to manipulate those mechanisms through mixed strategies that use one mechanism to create exploitative
opportunities over other mechanisms. In this framework, an agent is mapped to a role if that agent has a strategy relating
that role. It may be that the conditions for an action with respect to the role are never met, but as long as there is a
condition under which the agent would take such an action there is a mapping between the agent and the role.
In order to build a model capable of exploring multi-mechanism strategies it is necessary to maintain information about
each agents strategy across each role. The multi-graph model contains nodes and edges. Nodes have two types: (1)
Agent and (2) Role. Edges generally have two types: (1)Agent-Agent, (2) Agent-Role, though in principal Role-Role
edges are also well defined as needed. There are also more advanced relations such as agent-agent-role which are
required to manage data such as stakes in systems where agents can stake to delegate authority to another agent.
These multi-graph models allow us to enforce token conservation laws, encode complex multi-mechanism strategies,
view the state from an agent-centric view or from a role-centric view while maintaining internal consistency. See Figure
17 for a visual overview of the multi-graph agent-role data model.
Figure 17: The multi-graph data model has two types of nodes, agents and roles. Edges encode relationships between
agents and agents, as well as agents and roles.
36
A PREPRINT - AUGUST 19, 2019
E Appendix: Differential Specification Syntax
The differential specification is effectively described through a system modelling syntax. The symbols referenced in
the differential specification diagram are described here. Note that all information flows described are feed-forward,
feedback of state to any process is implicit. Furthermore, the differential specification is laid on a grid where the rows
are:
• The Policies determine the inputs to the system dynamics regardless of whether they come from the outside
environment, user behavior or algorithmic decision systems.
• The State Update Logic determines how the state of the system changes as a result of the inputs provided.
Note that not all outcomes are the outcomes intended by the actor (system or agent) when the input decision
was made due to the interdependence of these inputs.
• The State is flattened and summarized in order to keep track of the the interdependence of the mechanisms on
the same state variables. Note that the full data model for the state space is generally a network object for
which the shown states are mid-level aggregates or summary statistics.
• The Metrics are values computed from the state variables in order to assess the economic system. In a
computational model, metrics may be used for governance decisions, algorithmic policies or to inform the
behavior of individual agents.
The columns in a differential specification refer to the Partial State Update Block also called substeps, which break
the logic up into an ordered sequence in order to support second order dependencies. For example, there may be a set
of user behavior functions that resolve a decision to participate and incur some costs, and then a set of environmental
process drivers that determine the rewards those participants receive as a result of all of their decisions and the events
which transpire there after. A simple differential specification will have one or two substeps, whereas a complex
economic system could have 8 to 10 substeps.
Information Flow: Any data structure may be used to convey state update execution. The
expected path is from actions, policies, and processes to mechanisms to states variables to
metrics.
Environmental Process Driver: Data feed that informs an exogenous process. This may
be real or assumed data to provide updated input for a model representing a change of
external conditions.
User Behavior Function: A population or agent-based strategy developed using informa-
tion gathered from available state variables, metrics, external factors, internal beliefs, and
utility functions. The action space available to achieve the strategy is executed through
the mechanisms. No action may be fulfillment of the strategy. The user behavior/action
should not directly be a state variable.
37
A PREPRINT - AUGUST 19, 2019
Control Function: The controllable action space under the controlling entity. May be
actively controlled through a strategy developed using information gathered from available
publicly and privately known state variables, metrics, external factors, internal beliefs, and
utility functions. The action space available to achieve the strategy is executed through
the mechanisms. Passive control (no action) may correctly model this behavior. Policy
functions should not directly modify a state variable, but may affect any parameters in a
mechanism as well as the availability of a mechanism.
Environmental Process Model: A modelled generator providing an update to state
variables using external input signals from an environmental process driver. User action
behavior and control functions should not affect this model. The affected state variables
should be purely exogenously based, but may be blended from the internal state if
necessary to model the system. The exogenous state variables are the link between
the changes from the outside world germane to the modeled system, and provides the
information necessary for users and controllers to make decisions.
Mechanism: System defined functions that take user actions and control policy input to
update a set of state variables. Mechanism functions may be logically or operationally
grouped to be executed concurrently as a partial state update.
State Variable: Defined to capture the shape and property of the network, representing
publicly or privately held output of the system. The updates to the information can only
come through mechanisms and exogenous models and not user or control actions. The
data may be updated repeatedly within a simulated step. The resolution of all partial
updates is the state update.
Performance Indicator: Metrics calculated from a subset of state variables. The indica-
tor may represent actual publicly or privately available data. The metric could also be a
computed signal from the state used to determine the condition of a control policy. Also,
this may be an expected indicator employed by users to execute on their strategy. Care
must be taken to update the metric after the input state variable(s) are updated as to obtain
the correct result within a state update.
38
A PREPRINT - AUGUST 19, 2019
References
[1] Dr. Gavin Wood. Polkadot: Vision for a heterogeneous multi-chain framework.
https://polkadot.network/PolkaDotPaper.pdf, 2019.
[2] Iman Jahandideh, Fatemeh Ghassemi, and Marjan Sirjani. Hybrid rebeca: Modeling and analyzing of cyber-
physical systems. In Roger Chamberlain, Walid Taha, and Martin Törngren, editors, Cyber Physical Systems.
Model-Based Design, pages 3–27, Cham, 2019. Springer International Publishing.
[3] Marten Lohstroh, Patricia Derler, and Marjan Sirjani. Principles of Modeling, volume 10760. Springer: Lecture
Notes in Computer Science book series, 2018.
[4] John Sterman. Business dynamics, system thinking and modeling for a complex world. http://lst-iiep.iiep-
unesco.org/cgi-bin/wwwi32.exe/[in=epidoc1.in]/?t2000=013598/(100), 19, 01 2000.
[5] Michael Zargham, Zixuan Zhang, and Victor Preciado. A state-space modeling framework for engineering
blockchain-enabled economic systems. In Proceeding of the International Complex Systems Conference. New
England Complex Systems Institute, 2018.
[6] Z. Zhang, M. Zargham, and V.M. Preciado. On modeling blockchain-enabled economic networks as stochastic
dynamical systems. Applied Network Science: Blockchain and Cryptocurrency [accepted], 2019 [forthcoming].
[7] Jamsheed Shorish. Blockchain state machine representation. SocArXiv, Janu 2018.
[8] Dmitry Novikov. Systems Theory and Systems Analysis. Systems Engineering, volume 47, pages 39–44. 01 2016.
[9] S. Voshmgir and M. Zargham. Cryptoeconomics research roadmap: A cybernetics approach to token economics
and economic systems engineering. Vienna University of Economics and Business Working Paper Series, 2019.
[10] A Wayne Wymore. Model-based systems engineering. CRC press, 1993.
[11] Yaneer Bar-Yam. When systems engineering fails-toward complex systems engineering. In SMC’03 Conference
Proceedings. 2003 IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man and Cybernetics. Conference Theme-System
Security and Assurance (Cat. No. 03CH37483), volume 2, pages 2021–2028. IEEE, 2003.
[12] Yaneer Bar-Yam. General features of complex systems. Encyclopedia of Life Support Systems (EOLSS), UNESCO,
EOLSS Publishers, Oxford, UK, 1, 2002.
[13] Daniel DeLaurentis. Role of humans in complexity of a system-of-systems. In Vincent G. Duffy, editor, Digital
Human Modeling, pages 363–371, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2007. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
[14] Iohan Vargas, Thiago Gottardi, and Rosana Braga. Approaches for integration in system of systems: a systematic
review. pages 32–38, 05 2016.
[15] Radhakisan Baheti and Helen Gill. Cyber-physical systems. The impact of control technology, 12(1):161–166,
2011.
[16] James M. Tien. On integration and adaptation in complex service systems. Journal of Systems Science and
Systems Engineering, 17(4):385–415, Dec 2008.
[17] Lotfi A. Zadeh. Outline of a new approach to the analysis of complex systems and decision processes. IEEE
Trans. Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, 3(1):28–44, 1973.
[18] J. S. Shamma. Robust stability with time-varying structured uncertainty. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control,
39(4):714–724, April 1994.
[19] J.N. Tsitsiklis, D.P. Bertsekas, and M. Athans. Distributed asynchronous deterministic and stochastic gradient
optimization algorithms. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, 31(9):803–812, 1986.
[20] M. Chiang, S.H. Low, A.R. Calderbank, and J.C. Doyle. Layering as optimization decomposition: A mathematical
theory of network architectures. Proceedings of the IEEE, 95(1):255–312, 2007.
[21] Angelia Nedic, Asuman Ozdaglar, and Pablo A Parrilo. Constrained consensus and optimization in multi-agent
networks. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, 55(4):922–938, 2010.
[22] Reza Olfati-Saber and Richard M. Murray. Distributed cooperative control of multiple vehicle formations using
structural potential functions. IFAC Proceedings Volumes, 35(1):495 – 500, 2002. 15th IFAC World Congress.
[23] A. Jadbabaie, J. Lin, and S. Morse. Coordination of groups of mobile autonomous agents using nearest neighbor
rules. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, 48(6):988–1001, 2003.
[24] Reza Olfati-Saber. Flocking for multi-agent dynamic systems: Algorithms and theory. CALIFORNIA INST OF
TECH PASADENA CONTROL AND DYNAMICAL SYSTEMS, 2004.
39
A PREPRINT - AUGUST 19, 2019
[25] Engelbert J Dockner, Steffen Jorgensen, Ngo Van Long, and Gerhard Sorger. Differential games in economics and
management science. Cambridge University Press, 2000.
[26] Avner Friedman. Differential games. Courier Corporation, 2013.
[27] Yu-Chi Ho. Differential games, dynamic optimization, and generalized control theory. Journal of Optimization
Theory and Applications, 6(3):179–209, 1970.
[28] Rufus Isaacs. Differential games: a mathematical theory with applications to warfare and pursuit, control and
optimization. Courier Corporation, 1999.
[29] Tamer Basar and Geert Jan Olsder. Dynamic noncooperative game theory, volume 23. Siam, 1999.
[30] J. R. Marden, G. Arslan, and J. S. Shamma. Joint strategy fictitious play with inertia for potential games. IEEE
Transactions on Automatic Control, 54(2):208–220, Feb 2009.
[31] David WK Yeung and Leon A Petrosjan. Cooperative stochastic differential games. Springer Science & Business
Media, 2006.
[32] Yongcan Cao, Wenwu Yu, Wei Ren, and Guanrong Chen. An overview of recent progress in the study of distributed
multi-agent coordination. IEEE Transactions on Industrial informatics, 9(1):427–438, 2012.
[33] Robert Axelrod and William D Hamilton. The evolution of cooperation. science, 211(4489):1390–1396, 1981.
[34] Reza Olfati-Saber, J. Alex Fax, and Richard M. Murray. Consensus and cooperation in networked multi-agent
systems. Proceedings of the IEEE, 2007.
[35] Ernst Fehr and Klaus M Schmidt. A theory of fairness, competition, and cooperation. The quarterly journal of
economics, 114(3):817–868, 1999.
[36] J. R. Marden, G. Arslan, and J. S. Shamma. Cooperative control and potential games. IEEE Transactions on
Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part B (Cybernetics), 39(6):1393–1407, Dec 2009.
[37] David W Johnson and Roger T Johnson. Cooperation and competition: Theory and research. Interaction Book
Company, 1989.
[38] Yoad Lewenberg, Yoram Bachrach, Yonatan Sompolinsky, Aviv Zohar, and Jeffrey S Rosenschein. Bitcoin
mining pools: A cooperative game theoretic analysis. In Proceedings of the 2015 International Conference on
Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, pages 919–927. International Foundation for Autonomous Agents
and Multiagent Systems, 2015.
[39] Raymond A DeCarlo, Michael S Branicky, Stefan Pettersson, and Bengt Lennartson. Perspectives and results on
the stability and stabilizability of hybrid systems. Proceedings of the IEEE, 88(7):1069–1082, 2000.
[40] Daron Acemoglu, Vasco M. Carvalho, Asuman Ozdaglar, and Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi. The network origins of
aggregate fluctuations. Econometrica, 80(5):1977–2016, 2012.
[41] Dion Harmon, Marco Lagi, Marcus AM de Aguiar, David D Chinellato, Dan Braha, Irving R Epstein, and Yaneer
Bar-Yam. Anticipating economic market crises using measures of collective panic. PloS one, 10(7):e0131871,
2015.
[42] Daron Acemoglu, Asuman Ozdaglar, and Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi. Systemic risk and stability in financial networks.
American Economic Review, 105(2):564–608, February 2015.
[43] Yaneer Bar-Yam. Multiscale variety in complex systems. Complexity, 9(4):37–45, 2004.
[44] Yaneer Bar-Yam. A mathematical theory of strong emergence using multiscale variety. Complexity, 9(6):15–24,
2004.
[45] Dan Braha and Yaneer Bar-Yam. Topology of large-scale engineering problem-solving networks. Physical Review
E, 69(1):016113, 2004.
[46] Christian Wernz and Andrew Henry. Multi-level coordination and decision-making in service operations. Service
Science, 1(4):270–283, 2009.
[47] Christian Wernz and Abhijit Deshmukh. Multiscale decision-making: Bridging organizational scales in systems
with distributed decision-makers. European Journal of Operational Research, 202(3):828 – 840, 2010.
[48] Robert E. Lucas. Econometric policy evaluation: A critique. Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public
Policy, 1:19 – 46, 1976.
[49] Kenneth J Arrow, Hollis B Chenery, Bagicha S Minhas, and Robert M Solow. Capital-labor substitution and
economic efficiency. The review of Economics and Statistics, 43(3):225–250, 1961.
[50] Ole Peters and Alexander Adamou. Ergodicity Economics. London Mathematical Laboratory, 2018.
40
A PREPRINT - AUGUST 19, 2019
[51] John B Taylor, Michael Woodford, and Harald Uhlig. Handbook of macroeconomics. Elsevier, 1999.
[52] B. M. Friedman and Frank Hahn, editors. Handbook of Monetary Economics, volume 1. Elsevier, 1 edition, 1990.
[53] Nicholas Barberis and Richard Thaler. A survey of behavioral finance. Handbook of the Economics of Finance,
1:1053–1128, 2003.
[54] Edwin A Locke. Toward a theory of task motivation and incentives. Organizational behavior and human
performance, 3(2):157–189, 1968.
[55] Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman. Advances in prospect theory: Cumulative representation of uncertainty.
Journal of Risk and uncertainty, 5(4):297–323, 1992.
[56] Daniel Kahneman, Stewart Paul Slovic, Paul Slovic, and Amos Tversky. Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics
and biases. Cambridge university press, 1982.
[57] John H Kagel and Alvin E Roth. The handbook of experimental economics, volume 2. Princeton university press,
2016.
[58] Michael S Branicky. Multiple lyapunov functions and other analysis tools for switched and hybrid systems. IEEE
Transactions on automatic control, 43(4):475–482, 1998.
[59] Georgios Piliouras, Evdokia Nikolova, and Jeff S Shamma. Risk sensitivity of price of anarchy under uncertainty.
ACM Transactions on Economics and Computation (TEAC), 5(1):5, 2016.
[60] Alvin E Roth and Ido Erev. Learning in extensive-form games: Experimental data and simple dynamic models in
the intermediate term. Games and economic behavior, 8(1):164–212, 1995.
[61] Ali Jadbabaie, Pooya Molavi, Alvaro Sandroni, and Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi. Non-bayesian social learning. Games
and Economic Behavior, 76(1):210 – 225, 2012.
[62] Daron Acemoglu and Asuman Ozdaglar. Opinion dynamics and learning in social networks. Dynamic Games and
Applications, 1(1):3–49, 2011.
[63] Ido Erev and Alvin E Roth. Predicting how people play games: Reinforcement learning in experimental games
with unique, mixed strategy equilibria. American economic review, pages 848–881, 1998.
[64] Jianshu Chen and Ali H Sayed. Diffusion adaptation strategies for distributed optimization and learning over
networks. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, 60(8):4289–4305, 2012.
[65] Ilan Lobel and Evan Sadler. Information diffusion in networks through social learning. Theoretical Economics,
10(3):807–851, 2015.
[66] Michael Grieves and John Vickers. Digital twin: Mitigating unpredictable, undesirable emergent behavior in
complex systems. In Transdisciplinary perspectives on complex systems, pages 85–113. Springer, 2017.
[67] Flo Conway, Jim Siegelman, and Gerald L Alexanderson. Dark hero of the information age: In search of norbert
wiener, the father of cybernetics. The Mathematical Intelligencer, 28(2):70–73, 2006.
[68] K. W. Hipel, M. M. Jamshidi, J. M. Tien, and C. C. White III. The future of systems, man, and cybernetics:
Application domains and research methods. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part C
(Applications and Reviews), 37(5):726–743, Sep. 2007.
[69] Thomas Fischer and Christiane Herr. An Introduction to Design Cybernetics, pages 1–23. 07 2019.
[70] Richard Thaler. Toward a positive theory of consumer choice. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization,
1(1):39–60, 1980.
[71] Elinor Ostrom. A behavioral approach to the rational choice theory of collective action: Presidential address,
american political science association, 1997. American political science review, 92(1):1–22, 1998.
[72] Heinz Von Foerster. Ethics and second-order cybernetics. In Understanding understanding, pages 287–304.
Springer, 2003.
[73] Hoda Heidari, Claudio Ferrari, Krishna Gummadi, and Andreas Krause. Fairness behind a veil of ignorance: A
welfare analysis for automated decision making. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages
1265–1276, 2018.
[74] Kenneth Joseph Arrow. The economics of agency. Technical report, STANFORD UNIV CA INST FOR
MATHEMATICAL STUDIES IN THE SOCIAL SCIENCES, 1984.
[75] Martin Wollschlaeger, Thilo Sauter, and Juergen Jasperneite. The future of industrial communication: Automation
networks in the era of the internet of things and industry 4.0. IEEE industrial electronics magazine, 11(1):17–27,
2017.
41
A PREPRINT - AUGUST 19, 2019
[76] Alasdair Gilchrist. Industry 4.0: the industrial internet of things. Apress, 2016.
[77] Charith Perera, Chi Harold Liu, Srimal Jayawardena, and Min Chen. A survey on internet of things from industrial
market perspective. IEEE Access, 2:1660–1679, 2014.
[78] Jay Lee, Behrad Bagheri, and Hung-An Kao. A cyber-physical systems architecture for industry 4.0-based
manufacturing systems. Manufacturing letters, 3:18–23, 2015.
[79] Janusz J Sikorski, Joy Haughton, and Markus Kraft. Blockchain technology in the chemical industry: machine-to-
machine electricity market. In Applied Energy, volume 195, pages 234–246. Elsevier, 2017.
[80] Ragunathan Rajkumar, Insup Lee, Lui Sha, and John Stankovic. Cyber-physical systems: the next computing
revolution. In Design Automation Conference, pages 731–736. IEEE, 2010.
42
