Avalanche Native Token ($AVAX) Dynamics
2020/06/25
Stephen Buttolph, Amani Moin, Kevin Sekniqi, and Emin G¨un Sirer
Abstract. This paper discusses the key implementation details, in particular the
5 token economics (tokenomics), of the native token of the Avalanche platform, called
$AVAX. The native token secures the network, pays for fees, and provides the basic
unit of account between the multiple blockchains deployed on the larger Avalanche
network. For additional details on Avalanche, which serves as a versatile and universal platform, allowing anyone to launch new blockchains with their own rules,
10 virtual machines, and validator sets, we guide the reader to either the accompanying
architectural paper [1] or the Avalanche docs [2].
Git Commit: 30d3aeb5863f5fcb033f9a34bcad5f21a79a4b7d
Disclosure: The information described in this paper is preliminary and subject to change at any time. Furthermore,
this paper may contain forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements generally relate to future events
15 or our future performance. This includes, but is not limited to, Avalanche’s projected performance; the expected
development of its business and projects; execution of its vision and growth strategy; and completion of projects
that are currently underway, in development or otherwise under consideration. Forward-looking statements represent our managements beliefs and assumptions only as of the date of this presentation. These statements are not
guarantees of future performance and undue reliance should not be placed on them. Such forward-looking state20 ments necessarily involve known and unknown risks, which may cause actual performance and results in future
periods to di↵er materially from any projections expressed or implied herein. Avalanche undertakes no obligation
to update forward-looking statements. Although forward-looking statements are our best prediction at the time
they are made, there can be no assurance that they will prove to be accurate, as actual results and future events
could di↵er materially. The reader is cautioned not to place undue reliance on forward-looking statements.
25 1 Introduction
The economic model of any new digital currency/asset is one of the most critical components
of the platform that the asset resides on. This is especially true for the native token of a selfsovereign, permission-less platform, like Avalanche. In this paper, we discuss the economic
2 Stephen Buttolph, Amani Moin, Kevin Sekniqi, and Emin G¨un Sirer
design of the native token, called $AVAX. The discussion is broken down into the governance
30 properties of the token, its supply, minting (rewards) function of stakers, and other pertinent
economics details, such as the transactional economy.
1.1 Key $AVAX Properties
These are the key takeaway properties of the design of the $AVAX economics model:
– The resources spent by a validator for staking are proportional to that validator’s total
35 stake.
– The rewards accumulated by a validator for validating are proportional to that validator’s total stake.
– Since Avalanche is leaderless, there is no “rich-get-richer” compounding e↵ects.
– Validators that lock their stake for longer are rewarded more.
40 – Validators are incentivized to stay online and operate correctly as their rewards are
based on proof-of-uptime and proof-of-correctness.
– $AVAX is a capped-supply token, with a maximum cap of 720 million tokens.
– While capped, $AVAX is still governable. The rate at which the maximum cap is reached
is subject to governance.
45 – Fees are not paid to any specific validator. Instead, they are burned, thus increasing
scarcity of the $AVAX.
2 Governance
We initiate our survey of the Avalanche economic design by first discussing governance, as
it plays a critical role within future components. To enable the system to adapt to changing
50 economic conditions, the Avalanche platform enables key system parameters to be modified
dynamically based on user input. A workable process for finding globally acceptable values
for system parameters is critical for decentralized systems without custodians. Avalanche
can use its consensus mechanism to build a system that allows anyone to propose special
transactions that are, in essence, system-wide polls. Any participating node may issue such
55 proposals.
Reward rate is an important parameter that a↵ects any currency, whether digital or fiat.
Unfortunately, cryptocurrencies that fix this parameter might face various issues, including
deflation or hyper-inflation. To that end, the reward rate will be subject to governance,
Avalanche Native Token ($AVAX) Dynamics 2020/06/25 3
within pre-established boundaries. This will allow token holders to choose the rate at which
60 $AVAX reaches its capped supply.
Transaction fees, denoted by the set F, will also be eventually be governed. F is e↵ectively a tuple which describes the fees associated with the various instructions and transactions supported in future releases. Finally, staking times and amounts will also be governable.
The list of these parameters is defined in Figure 1.
–  : Staking amount, denominated in $AVAX. This value defines the minimal stake
required to be placed as bond before participating in the system. The default value
on genesis will be 2,000 $AVAX.
– min : The minimal amount of time required for a node to stake into the system.
The default value on genesis will be 2 weeks.
– max : The maximal amount of time a node can stake. The default value on genesis
will be 52 weeks.
– ,  : The two key parameters in governing the minting rate function.
– F : the fee structure, which is a set of governable fees parameters that specify costs
to various transactions.
Fig. 1. Key governable parameters used in Avalanche.
65 Ultimately, we note that governance in $AVAX has hysteresis, meaning that changes to
parameters are highly dependent on their recent changes. There are two limits associated
with each governable parameter: time and range. Once a parameter is changed using a
governance transaction, it becomes very dicult to change it again immediately and by a
large amount. These diculty and value constraints relax as more time passes since the last
70 change. These restrictions are in keeping with the design philosophy of predictability: the
system must never change drastically over a short period of time, allowing users to safely
predict system parameters in the short term, while having strong control and flexibility for
the long term.
3 Token Economics
75 $AVAX has a capped-supply of 720,000,000 (720M) tokens. The genesis block will have 360M
$AVAX tokens. The rest of the 360M tokens will be minted according to Equation 1. For
a graphical representation, Figure 2 shows the token emissions curve between $AVAX and
BTC. The principle of the emissions function chosen for Avalanche is simple: reach a capped
4 Stephen Buttolph, Amani Moin, Kevin Sekniqi, and Emin G¨un Sirer
supply, in a fashion similar to Bitcoin’s emissions curve, and yet maintain the ability to
80 govern the rate at which the system reaches this limit.
3.1 Minting Function
Rj is total number of tokens at year j, with R1 = 360M, and Rl representing the last year
that the values of ,  2 R were changed; cj is the yet un-minted supply of coins to reach
720M at year j such that cj  360M; u represents a staker, with u.samount representing
85 the total amount of stake that u possesses, and u.stime the length of staking for u.
Rj = Rl +X
8u
⇢(u.samount, u.stime) ⇥ (cj/L) ⇥
0
BBB@
X
j
i=0
1
✓
 +
1
1 + i

◆i
1
CCCA
(1)
where,
L =
0
BBB@
X1
i=0
1
✓
 +
1
1 + i

◆i
1
CCCA
(2)
At genesis, c1 = 360M. The values of  and  are governable, and if changed, the function
is recomputed with the new value of c⇤. We have that P
⇤ ⇢(⇤)  1. ⇢(⇤) is a linear function
that can be computed as follows (u.stime is measured in weeks, and u.samount is measured
90 in $AVAX tokens):
⇢(u.samount, u.stime) = (0.002 ⇥ u.stime + 0.896) ⇥
u.samount
Rj
(3)
If the entire supply of tokens at year j is staked for the maximum amount of staking time
(one year, or 52 weeks), then P
8u ⇢(u.samount, u.stime) = 1. If, instead, every token is staked
continously for the minimal stake duration of two weeks, then P
8u ⇢(u.samount, u.stime) =
0.9. Therefore, staking for the maximum amount of time incurs an additional 11.11% of
95 tokens minted, incentivizing stakers to stake for longer periods. Due to the capped-supply,
the function above guarantees that regardless of the number of governance changes, we will
never exceed a total of 720M tokens. Therefore,
lim
j=1 Rj = 720M (4)
Avalanche Native Token ($AVAX) Dynamics 2020/06/25 5
0.0 2.5 5.0 7.5 10.0 12.5 15.0 17.5 20.0
Years Since Genesis
0
20
40
60
80
100
% of Total Cap Reached
AVAX (100% staked)
AVAX (50% staked)
BTC
0 20 40 60 80 100
Years Since Genesis
0
20
40
60
80
100
% of Total Cap Reached
AVAX (100% staked)
AVAX (50% staked)
BTC
Fig. 2. Token emissions between $AVAX and BTC, calculated over a 20 year and 100 year
horizon, with  = 1.15 and  = 1.1. The curve for “$AVAX (100% staked)” represents the
case where every token is being staked repeatedly for the maximum staking duration of one
year, i.e. P
8u ⇢(u.samount, u.stime) = 1. On the other hand, the curve of “$AVAX (lower)”
represents the case where only 50% of the tokens are being staked repeatedly over the
minimal staking duration of two weeks, i.e. P
8u ⇢(u.samount, u.stime)=0.45. We note that,
for simplicity, these graphs represent the case where  and  are fixed at genesis and never
governed afterwards. The goal of changing  and  is to increase total supply of tokens in
case the empirically observed total staked supply is too low.
6 Stephen Buttolph, Amani Moin, Kevin Sekniqi, and Emin G¨un Sirer
4 Minting Mechanism
Minting in $AVAX is designed to incentivize nodes to behave in a way that positively helps
100 global outcomes. This is accomplished by special minting transactions. A node earns the
right to mint by first putting up a stake and then participating actively in the consensus
process. Specifically, node rewards are directly linked to their uptime and response latency.
Every node maintains local information about the liveness and behavior of each other node
with which it interacted. Whenever a node v is sampled by u, the latter maintains a local
105 tuple of (response bit, timestamp). The first entry is a single bit representing whether v
responded within the timeout, and the second represents the timestamp of the response. In
other words, minting in Avalanche is done via proof-of-uptime and proof-of-responsiveness.
This mechanism has important consequences. In particular, since there is no “leader” accumulating rewards, there is no “rich-get-richer” compounding e↵ects.
110 5 Transaction Economy
5.1 Fees Structure
The fee structure in the Avalanche platform carries several di↵erentiating features that
distinguish it from other existing and upcoming platforms.
Staker Fees. Unlike other protocols that pay all fees to the elected leader, such as in Bitcoin,
115 in Avalanche fees are simply burned. Therefore, payment is global and for the good of the
entire ecosystem. Fee burning increases scarcity of tokens in the system. The minting process
o↵sets the transaction fee burning, therefore there is no danger of the system grinding to a
long term halt due to gradual destruction of coins.
Transaction Costs. In Avalanche, transaction fees di↵er depending on the type of transac120 tion. Instantiations of new subnetworks carry the heaviest fees. In contrast, other types of
transactions, such as simple payments of $AVAX, carry little cost. For other subnets, transactions pay fees in that subnet’s native token, as well as some amount in the $AVAX token.
A transaction native to a subnetwork may specify its own transaction fee structure, and it
is up to the creator of the subnet to choose a fee structure that incentivizes validation for
125 open, permissionless subnetworks.
Avalanche Native Token ($AVAX) Dynamics 2020/06/25 7
Sliding Cost Function. Transaction fees carry a sliding-cost function. The fee is not set
by the issuer of the transaction, but rather by a globally verifiable fee-function. As the
congestion in the network increases, fees increase. At the end of some specific period of
time, the function is recalculated to accommodate natural increases in transaction volume
130 in the network.
Transaction Tiers. Unlike in a model such as Ethereum’s, where every transaction invocation must pay some gas, Avalanche adopts a di↵erent model that incorporates two types
of transaction processing mechanisms. All keys with positive account balances will be able
to immediately interact with the platform, where the fees will be based on an allotment
135 mechanism, functionally similar to a tiered payments model adopted in cloud computing
platforms. Every transaction will name a sender address (i.e. the invoker), which will be
checked for current invocation allotment. If the address still has free invocations left, the
transaction does not have to carry any fees attached by the sender. Past a certain amount
of calls, the sender will need to attach some fees based on the resources used to compute the
140 transaction. Additionally, users may opt instead pay for their transactions using computation. To that end, future releases will support free frequency-limited transactions, which do
not require fees in coins but require some pre-computation. Whenever a new transaction is
generated, the user will compute and attach a valid PoW on the transaction, which can be
checked by all other parties.
145 5.2 Spam Management
Although simple payments do carry fees, the value will be virtually zero. This, however,
can lead to spam in the network. In future releases, to prevent congestion, each transaction
carries with it a local PoW. The PoW is initially of low diculty and therefore a transaction
can be immediately issued with very little overhead. However, if a specific key generates a
150 large amount of transactions in a short amount of time, each subsequent transaction will
carry a larger amount of diculty in its PoW puzzle. This mechanism works in conjunction
with the fee burning.
References
1. AVA: Avalanche platform paper - architectural overview (2019),
155 https://files.avalabs.org/papers/platform.pdf
2. AVA: Avalanche platform documentation (2025), https://docs.avax.network
